Becky is the Deputy Secretary, for Environment.
I also have a number of my MFE officials with me if
required this morning. The government is focused on delivering on its climate
strategy to cut emissions and adapt to a changing climate while driving
economic growth. Our first years in government laid the foundations of the
plans, like the Second Emissions Reduction Plan and National
Adaptation Framework. This year, we are continuing to deliver those
plans. We have a clear work programme, and we're making good progress against
milestones. Our latest projections show that we will likely meet our
first emissions budget, and we are on track to achieve the
second. We are also on track to achieve our net zero
target by 2050 and may achieve it as
early as 2044.
Over four years, we've committed $400 million to accelerate the development and
commercialization of agricultural tools and technologies to
reduce agricultural emissions. We are also making significant
progress on renewables and electrification, progressing Electrify New
Zealand to drive investment in renewable electricity by removing barriers
to consenting. Projects currently before the expert panel, already
approved through the fast-track approvals process, could add around an additional
1,700 megawatt hours of new generation.
This represents close to an increase of 20% of New Zealand's
current capacity. We're also investing just over $50
million in zero interest loans to help double the number of public EV
chargers with the support of the private sector with co-investment.
Recently in the budget, you would have seen the announcements around the gas
transition loan guaranteeing scheme, which will make up to $1.2
billion of bank loans available to businesses to eliminate or
reduce their dependency on reticulated gas.
We're also investing, in the budget, $30 million in the Solar
on Schools program, which will provide up to 500 schools the ability to
install solar panels and batteries.
This aligns with other work around EDB regulation, making sure that
consumers get fair market export tariffs and remove
barriers for rooftop solar, which helps our broader emissions targets.
We're also driving work through the National Adaptation Framework to build an
enduring system to prepare for the impact of climate change.
Just over $11 or $10.5 million has been invested in the Maori Climate
Platform to support climate resilient projects.
This work is underway on the ground.
Includes Marae-based solar, flood mitigation, and battery and water
storage. We're developing New Zealand's first flood map, continuing investment
in Budget 26 will ensure that communities have trusted, consistent
picture of flood hazard information and better data to make
more informed decisions when extreme weather is becoming more
frequent and severe. And shortly, we'll be introducing legislation
requiring councils to prepare adaptation plans for high priority
areas. This works in hand with our new planning
system. Budget 26 invests in simpler, faster, and more consistent planning
system that makes it easier to get things done.
The new system will also include goals to safeguard communities from the risks
of natural hazards and improve our understanding as an important
precursor to managing natural hazard risks.
Lastly, Madam Chair, our work ahead focuses on our climate goals while
supporting our community, environment, and economy to thrive.
And with that, I'll welcome questions from the committee.
Thank you very much, Minister, for that overview.
We will start with Deborah Russell.
Thank you.
Minister,
I guess there's a whole lot of stuff that I want to talk about, but let's...
I know that
Chloe has stuff that she wants to talk about as well.
I guess my major concern is around the emissions trading
scheme
and the extent to which work needs to go on to ensure that the
scheme continues to function effectively and that the
auctions work as needed. We know that it's,
under current settings, the ETS looks like
it will
run out, as it were, in the 2030s.
This morning, the unit price is sitting at about
$53 a ton,
so well below what we need.
That's from a secondary market, and we actually need the price
to be quite a bit higher than that for the auctions to start clearing.
So could you let us know what work you are doing or intend
to do to ensure that the emissions trading scheme does actually start
to function as a tool for driving down emissions?
Yeah, thanks for the question. Obviously, as minister, I won't
comment on the ETS market prices. However, I will
note that the ETS market remains
cautious, with high interest in climate policy that
the government releases. As you've noted, the price is currently sitting in
around above the low 50s, and that has been the
case for most of May and June. In regards to
the key aspect of intervention by
government, it is to ensure, and our climate strategy outlines this, that we want
a credible ETS market in order to do the heavy lifting around emissions
reduction. The point that you're noting is, is that the price point
at where it's at at the market at the moment versus the point
of tension of what that price needs to be to actually see
the emissions reductions coming down.
There is
two points in that context. The government's policy has been
one of applying certainty. We're currently out for
consultation in regards to the settings of the ETS market,
and we'll be taking feedback in regards to that.
But it's also fair, as you've noted,
that actually, when you look at carbon prices internationally, and particularly the
UK and EU prices, have seen significant reductions
in that price point in the last six to nine months.
So we are seeing a degree of volatility in an international sense
around carbon pricing as well,
and for multiple reasons in regards to that
Oh.
Chloe just had a supplementary on that-
Oh, I wonder if I might have a couple of questions
... if you want me to carry on. Yeah, go.
Yeah. No, then we'll hand over to you.
And I'm not going to take too much time.
It's just a supplement ETS, but then, yeah. That's okay.
Okay. Yeah, we'll come to you on the ETS questions as well-
Yeah, before we go to primary
... Chloe, but if Deborah can kind of-
Sure, no worries
... take the original question line.
What was I going to ask? Oh. Yeah, we use the word volatility, but I
wonder if the better word is skepticism about ETS markets
worldwide, to the extent that pricing is not going to drive the changes we
need, and we may need to regulate in order to drive emissions down.
The wording I used deliberately was that the market remains cautious, and I think
that would be a fair assessment in terms of where-
Okay
... the market is in the context of our broader
climate policy. What's interesting is that the price of the market
has returned to levels comparable to where they were
prior to the CCRRA amendments announced in November of
last year. And the other factor in play in the New Zealand market is the
forestry supply
and demand. And there is a
degree of uncertainty in regards to that aspect,
which does have an impact in regards to future prices.
That's a lovely segue, because that's exactly where I was going to go next, was
forestry. So we've had quite a bit of commentary,
especially from the Parliamentary Commissioner from the Environment, but also from
other
people, that exotic forestry in the ETS
is creating problems. And part of the reason is
as that carbon price goes,
sitting around about 53, that incentivizes more planting of exotic forestry.
But also we just don't quite know how much exotic forestry is out there that could
come into the ETS. What work are you doing around the role of exotic forestry
in the ETS?
So one of the announcements and policy changes that the government has made in
this term is in regards to the introduction of, in
effect, a restriction of the amount of exotic forestry that is able to be-
Sure
... go into the ETS. And so those announcements were made last year, in
effect providing a cap depending on the land use classification
aspect. Before that came into place, there was, in effect, no
cap or restriction on the amount of exotic forestry that was able to go
into the ETS. That has provided,
in effect, a cap, and we'll be monitoring that aspect as it
plays through. Sam, I don't know if there's any other context that you
wanted to provide.
No.
But general point is that there are trade-offs
that any policy decision makers have to weigh up when
considering the role of forestry and volume of forestry within the ETS.
And
forestry can help to reduce the cost of the transition, but as
others have pointed to, it comes with some trade-offs-
Yeah
... that,
yeah, are material, will need to be considered carefully.
So one last question before I just-
Yes, go for it
... desist.
So again, it's around forestry. So my
understanding is that we just don't know how much exotic forestry
is out there that may come into the ETS, and that's one of the
problems that's creating uncertainty.
And of course, it flows into issues around the register and all sorts of things
like that.
Absolutely.
So I wonder if you could just comment on that as to
what we know
about
end of use that may come into
the ETS because of exotic forestry, and as it were, a
stocktake of exotic forestry that's sitting out there that might into the ETS.
Yeah. It's absolutely one of the areas that, as I've highlighted, is the
aspect that does bring volatility to the market because of the awareness and the
understanding of the demand and supply.
Becky will be able to probably give a little bit more context on that.
Yeah. There's not a lot of concern that there might be sort of existing
exotic forests-
Yeah
... that are not in the ETS but might come in.
I think maybe, do you mean that there's uncertainty around how much planting
there might be in the future, and when that would come in?
Yeah.
Yeah. Yeah, that's true. The future projections for how much planting might take
place are always a bit uncertain, just I guess with anything in the
future.
We have things like surveys of foresters' intentions that give
us a sense of how much to project, and that kind of thing.
I think that's what you're talking about.
Yeah, that's what
Yeah. There is always uncertainty.
Since it is a significant part of the emissions
trading team, it has a significant impact because of that uncertainty, but it's not
sort of inherently more uncertain than anything else in the climate change
area.
Okay. All right. Thank you.
One of the key aspects around forestry particularly is that we do acknowledge that
it is a long-term investment, and the horizon for that investment is
multi-decade. And therefore, the
importance of having certainty of a policy position in regards to that, because
they are, in effect, private property rights for individuals in the context
of the units that are held, and decisions and implications around policy does have
an implication on value of existing private property rights.
So that component is equally important.
But we are looking to see how do we get better information and data on the
intentions,
but acknowledging forecasts are, in many aspects,
a degree of art, not science, because of the reality of
AR forecasting.
Thank you. Thank you. Look, we'll stay on ETS and we'll come to Chloe.
Yeah, I just had three key questions in the space of the ETS.
Minister, just to reflect on your answers there, you've obviously alluded to the
fact that this government's kind of major tool in emissions mitigation
is the ETS.
You've said that it needs certainty and that you want a credible market.
But here, I'm quoting from the Climate Change Commission's annual advice, in which
it said, quote, "A significant drop in NZU prices followed government policy
announcements on the 4th of November 2025.
Market participants have reported that the perception of continued weakening of
climate policy in general is contributing to low market sentiment." To
that effect, it is apparently abundantly clear to all market players
and to the expert independent advisors to the government that the reason that the
ETS, which you say you want to be credible, is failing, is as a
result of your government policy. What do you say about that?
Yeah, well, I completely disagree with that.
The quote that you're making is referenced in a point in time
of, if I heard you rightly, November of last year.
And I made this in my opening statements before, that the precision of where the
market is now at is, is it has returned to levels comparable to those prior
to the amendment points. They're sitting in the low 50s.
At the point in which that advice was provided, the market was trading in
the upper 30s, and the reality of
the market is, is it has taken a period of time to digest the
reality of the policy change. I said at the time that the policy
change does not at all impact the fundamentals of the market.
However, the market has taken time, but is now
trading back. So the reference of the quote is in a point of time of which
is not the reality of where we are today.
So why then have the vast majority of emissions trading scheme auctions
failed under your tenure? If it's that the market players are wrong and the
independent expert advisors are wrong, why are you right?
So first and foremost, I don't agree with the premise that the market is failing.
The market operates as any market would, and that is in order
to meet demand and supply.
Response to government policy.
And we're talking about the government market, not the secondary market, of which
the prices are being quoted in the prior
response. In effect, and this links into the aspect around the
conversation on forestry is, is that the demand for
units that government auction is not sufficient to
meet the price and the strike price in which we're offering those.
And the market is able to
obtain the units through the secondary market and doesn't rely on the auctions.
The fact that the auctions are not clearing is not a
indication that there is a market failure.
Actually, it is an indication that the market is working as it should do, i.e.
demand meets supply, and that is what's happening.
We remain of the view, though, that we do want the ETS to do the heavy lifting
around emissions reduction. We want there to be, and we want the ETS to be a
credible market. About $8
billion of
trades go through that market every year.
It is a significant financial market and goes back to the property
rights. And the role of government policy does have
quite a significant impact on that market, unlike, say, equity
markets or other financial markets
that are in play. So we take that very seriously.
And likewise, the economics of where the ETS price
sits also has quite significant economic implications on
broader, say, the forestry sector, for example, as well.
So it's
simply acknowledging that from policy point of view, we want to be
very clear and concise around what we will do and not do.
Stability of policy positions, no surprises,
and we do actively seek feedback from the market and market participants
around their ideas of how we could strengthen the ETS.
It is government's position clearly in our strategy that we want a
credible ETS market, and that's representative of the
actions government takes.
I think market participants have been abundantly clear.
Are you aware of the fact that under your current plans, in order to meet Emissions
Budget 3, you are requiring 46% of planned emissions
reductions to come through forestry?
So in regards to Emissions Budget 3, which is for the period
2031 to 2035,
we're currently tracking as of the latest projections at
3.6% below that target, and that
target is that of 2035. I'm confident that
while we still have around 8.7 million
tons of CO2 to make up between now and 2035,
2035 is not tomorrow. We have time, and we have a
comprehensive program of actions underway.
Any future point forecast, there is always challenge, either under or over.
What I am happy, though, is, is that EB1, for the period ending 2025,
and EB2, for the period ending 2030, both of those, based on the
current trajectory of this government's climate policy, are on track to meet those
targets and actually exceed them based on their forecasts at the
moment. And when we're talking plus or minus 3% under and over
budget, five or seven years or nine years from out,
I think in the scheme of challenge and opportunity, we're doing
okay. We have adaptive management procedures in place where ministers meet
on a regular basis to discuss if we're not
tracking on the target, what do we need to adapt to that.
And I lead those conversations, and we had one in the last few
months actually, where ministers discussed plans to ensure that we
remain on track for our target.
That wasn't my question, Minister.
My question was about whether you're aware-
It's okay
... that under current plans to meet Emissions Budget 3, you are
relying for at least 46% of those emissions reductions to come from
forestry. Are you aware of that?
Well, I wrote the plan, so with respect, I am aware of the
policy. So,
the emissions reduction-
That's good to know. So sorry. I'm just aware that we have such limited time.
Just enable the minister to-
But we have such limited time
... just finish, Chloe, and then we will move.
I'd really appreciate a back and forth so we can actually have some answers.
Yeah. I just answered the-
Yeah, cool. Great. So thank you for that
... Yeah, I wrote the plan.
So to that effect
Have you got a different question?
No, it's related to particularly the forestry point.
Okay. Yeah. One more question, Chloe, and then we'll move on.
Minister
There's lots of areas here to-
Have you engaged at all with the conservation minister or other
environmental ministers who are currently proposing serious changes to the
Conservation Act, which would enable the sell-off of our conservation estate, which
would therefore have an effect on carbon sequestration in this country, a
huge swath of this country, and the impact that that will have on the ability to
sequester carbon, and therefore meet these emissions budgets?
I regularly meet with my ministerial colleagues, including the Minister for
Conservation, to talk about my portfolio areas and their portfolios.
Have you engaged on the Conservation Act?
They are representative as part of the broader ministerial group
that we meet regularly around climate targets.
My interaction with those ministers in that regard is under
those aspects of governance.
Have you raised any risks about the ability for us to sequester
carbon as a result of the proposed changes under the Conservation Act to sell off
and enable economic development on our conservation estate?
I'm comfortable that the changes proposed by the Minister of Conservation in
regards to changes around the Conservation Act do not provide
the material risk that you are implying in regards
to our broader targets.
Look, thank you. And we will obviously have the conservation minister in
later today, that will also be able to address some of those questions.
This is the prime minister you should be asking.
We'll come to Grant McCallum for a question.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Morning, Minister.
Last week, I attended Fieldays, and we made an announcement around the
AgriZero Early Adopter Accelerator program.
You want to just sort of walk us through the $51 million we announced and how you
see that's going to help with emissions reduction tools on farm?
Mm. Good question.
Yeah. Thanks, Grant, and I thought the
conversations that I had at Fieldays in regards to the progress
that we're making, in that regard, were very positive.
Mm.
I think it is important to highlight, and often,
the success of AgriZero and the $400 million and the additional
funding that was announced at budget is one of the success stories of
how private sector and government and NGO are working together
around solving probably which is one of the most complex-
Mm
... climate challenges, which is around methane
reduction. AgriZero have around 17
different work streams currently underway.
A number of those work streams actually will have
tools that are going to be available in market by
the end of this year.
And that is very positive. They include
inhibitors, probiotics, vaccines.
There are also work, as you'll be aware, on
the aspect around
oxidation ponds,
as well, and reduction of emissions in that area, pasture, and
also the genetics work that's underway-
Yeah
... both for
beef cows and sheep in that context.
So look, I think that it is positive,
and it's interesting also that particularly Ireland, which is a pastoral-based
nation, which also is dealing with the same grappling issues around that,
how New Zealand and Ireland are working collaboratively around the
science space around methane reduction because we're both
pastoral-based farming systems.
Sure.
The challenge is also one for us around methane reduction, but the
biggest challenge is when you think about who has the largest dairy herd in the
world, India-
Sure
... and other jurisdictions like that, how New Zealand can actually play to our
strengths as an R&D and innovator-
Sure
... and share that technology with other countries.
Mm.
It is quite exciting, I think, around the opportunity of New Zealand playing a
leadership role around-
Sure
... technology that not only increases productivity and economic-
... gain for farmers, which is first and foremost, but the secondary
benefit of that is a reduction of emissions.
And that's the sweet spot, really.
So positive feedback, and as a dairy farmer, I'm sure you'll be, uh-
Very aware, yeah
... on that fondly.
Yeah. And just one fur- one sup on that.
So
why do you prefer that technological approach as opposed to what some would
prefer to see, which is just a blanket reduction in animals?
Well, because it's practical.
Mm.
And it's realistic.
And it works. Uh, and it has engagement.
I
think it'd be fair to say that no one wants to be in a
position where industry are at war with government.
Yeah.
Right? And you're seeing that in other jurisdictions, and we had challenges in
regards to that. We're now in a position where the government
and industry are working with each other.
There's no head in the sand that there isn't a challenge here-
Yeah
... that we need to deal with.
That's right.
And I think under the leadership of AgriZero, with Rob Hewett-
Yeah
... who's a farmer, who is very much of the view that the challenge now,
once we've got the tools, is how do you accelerate the uptake-
That's right
... of those interventions and how do you create a mechanism, which is
the incentive, but also the
tension for uptake. But we also have to be
cautious because what we saw in Europe around some of the
early-
Bovine, yeah
... fast adoption of these tools before they were fully proven and fully
tested, have had to retract, and then there's a loss of trust.
And-
That's right
... with any industry, I will back a farmer in the
paddock to know their business better than anyone in this building, with the
exception of a few of you at the table, because you are-
Thank you. I appreciate that
... both, but do you know what I mean?
Yeah.
We've got to just make sure that we're working with industry.
But the tension has been right, as is that, go back last year
or the year before, even three years, there was a lot of talk about tools, but
I think the confidence level that they would actually deliver emissions reduction
... was not as high.
Yeah, that's right.
And I shared that concern, and I know many around the table would as well.
I think we've worked hard to increase the transparency of what's happening, when
it's going to happen, how much impact it will have around emissions reduction, and
also equally, it's not just an emissions conversation, it's an economic growth,
productivity conversation.
Sure.
Because
a more economic and productive agri-sector has more money to go around,
which means that we've got more investment to do everything in regards
to the broader challenges that we have, of which climate change is one.
Thank you.
And David just had a supplementary on that.
He does a supplementary.
And then Chloe does too. Yes.
So Minister, just following on from that, do you think that this approach is
leading to the point of not needing methane pricing,
and if not, why not?
Well, the government has always been of the view that
pricing in absence of practical tools and solutions for farmers to deploy to
reduce emissions reduction is not going to be a feasible,
nor enduring mechanism to reduce emissions.
It is sort of at one degree common sense that in order to reduce
emissions, you need to have the means and mechanism to do so
without, in effect, which is what some European countries are
doing, is culling their herds and reducing their
productivity and their production.
Of which we know, if New Zealand did that, it would simply be exported
to another jurisdiction. Which New Zealand farmers are some of the most
carbon efficient pastoral farmers in the world, and so therefore, that
doesn't help anyone.
So we very much do invest in science, technology and innovation,
the tools and techniques that allow us to increase productivity and emissions, and
work with the farming community to deploy and increase the uptake of those as and
when they are credible and they are appropriate and ready to go to market.
Acknowledging consumers are very sensitive to new
technology across the board, not just in this area.
So, we're doing that, and to pair that, we're working with
colleagues such as Ireland, such as Australia, so that we've got
multiple countries working together on this type of
area so that we're not out of step. Again, I see this as
probably one of the most fundamental and game-changing
areas of emissions reduction for climate and productivity
increase actually for-
That's right
... agriculture at a global level.
Oh, yeah, Agri Zero.
And I spoke about that in COP when I had a panel on sustainable farming.
Agri Zero, yeah.
And actually, again, we often probably underestimate how
advanced New Zealand is in the space.
And while we wished we'd have those tools three years ago,
we are well advanced of any other jurisdiction in the world around increasing
productivity on farm and getting the by-product of that, which is emissions
reduction. So, let's see how we go in the next 12 to 18
months.
Thank you. We'll just take another couple of supplementaries on agricultural
emissions.
Chloe, and then come to Deborah.
Minister, can I just confirm that the fund, that that announcement
at Fieldays came from, was the AgTech fund, which
was funded by the former government and then reannounced by your
government in 2024, after your government had cut
approximately $50 million from it?
No, I can't
confirm your points that you're making in the second part of your-
I've got an OIA from Treasury that says that
... statement there. But the funding announcement was made by
Minister Maclay, so it's best directed to him in regards to that technicality.
And which fund does it come from, sorry?
Which fund?
I said the announcement was made by Minister Maclay.
Yeah, but you just spent quite a long time talking about it. Which fund is it?
I talked about it because in the context of emissions reduction, any investment
across any portfolio is a... Let's just remember the way that climate change works
under the government. I have accountability on behalf of the Prime Minister to
ensure that New Zealand meets its targets.
The relevant ministers who have portfolio responsibility,
agriculture, energy, transport, have responsibility to ensure that their
portfolio delivers the actions required in order to reduce emissions in
their portfolio areas. It is a matrix, and that is why my
role is to ensure that I work with my colleague ministers, to deliver that.
I understand.
There's nothing wrong with another minister using their budget to fund an emissions
reduction initiative.
I understand all of those things, Minister, but you were just talking quite
excitedly about the investment that's being made, and the point that I'm making is
that you cut 50, well, your government cut $50 million from that investment
that you were talking about as though it's an awesome thing.
It previously had been a larger fund under the former government.
Yeah, when I wake up in the morning, I wake up thinking positively and-
About cuts
... I make no apology for being positive about the ambitions and optimism of the
New Zealand primary sector.
How have they managed it this time?
And the role we're doing around research and development.
We should all celebrate that.
So ambitious, the bar of the Treasury.
And I wish the opposition actually would celebrate that at some point, rather than
being so negative.
And just sticking with agriculture emissions, Deborah, you've got a question.
This one, I was going to make a similar point, that the commitment to Agri
Zero
is a cross-government one, that it started under the previous government and was
continued by this government, and actually we're all committed to it because it's-
Yeah, and look, I acknowledge that, Deborah. You're right.
Thank you. If I could clarify the actual question.
I think the challenge with climate change is that we do-
Yeah
... policy flip-flop's not helpful.
We want to make sure that we've got enduring aspect, and Agri Zero has been a
real success. I think we've built on that and it's a great success.
Well, let's leave policy flip-flops to one side, because we might push a bit.
Look, I just want to, it's following on from a point that David made,
that
in the absence of technologies to actually reduce
methane, it would not be particularly helpful to have a pricing mechanism in
there. But Minister, you've just said that in fact some of those technologies are
coming on board quite soon, and I've done the same talking to you with
Ruminant Biotech and the people doing the vaccines and this, that, and the other.
So they're looking quite close. Does that imply that you will introduce a pricing
mechanism once those technologies are available?
No, it doesn't.
Okay.
We've been very clear in regards to our policy intent that Uh,
pricing, uh, is not, uh, helpful in the
context of where, uh, we do not have, uh, the means for farmers to
be able to reduce, uh, methane emission on farm.
But that's-
Our focus and priority is on ensuring they have the technology
pipeline, the tools and development for New Zealand farmers to be able to reduce
emissions. Uh, and actually what we're seeing already, uh,
with, um, uh, initiatives such as Eco Pond.
We don't have pricing today, but it doesn't stop, uh, you know, dairy
farmers in New Zealand and Fonterra and Synlait increasing the
uptake of Eco Pond, which has a circa
9% reduction in regards to not only methane, but also, uh,
nitrous oxide as well. So, um, look,
farmers in New Zealand, as we know, have always been at the forefront of
taking up, uh, innovation technology.
And the reason is, is that these innovation and technology, um,
developments, first and foremost, are productivity enhancing developments.
They increase production-
That's right
... they increase profitability.
But like solar power, people are doing that because of the economics.
Yes, there is a secondary benefit of climate, and that is great, but farmers are
doing so because of the economic reality.
Uh, and you know, that's something that, as a government, we, uh, support and wish
to see further of.
With respect, Minister-
Thank you. Just one last one on this.
Yeah. It's quite important because, um, uh, when I've been meeting
with Federated Farmers and Dairy NZ and so on, they've challenged me.
They've said, "Hang on a second. Markets are driving the change
in, um, our insustainability and around
methane, and, um, uh, we'll do enough through market
mechanisms to, to meet it." So I went and tested that with,
um, some of our food processors, so people like Silver Fern Farms and
Fonterra and so on. And their response was that in actual fact,
being clean and green, sustainable, uh, meeting our climate
targets in these days only gets us to the
table. It doesn't get us the market.
Um, and in particular, we've got some very strong commitments, particularly in our
EU trade agreements and so on, that we must continue to meet our
environmental and our,
and our, um-
Climate
... climate objectives. But at the same time, markets alone aren't going
to do that in terms of getting change on farms.
So it does really rather imply that sooner or later we're going to need to have, as
well as the carrots, um, of the higher
prices that we get for sustainable products, we are going to need to have some
sticks as well in the form of pricing mechanisms or regulation
once we've got those tools available.
So, you know, it does suggest that we may need to go on that route once those
tools are available.
Have you got a question? Um-
That's, I'm asking, that's the comment.
That's sort of, it's responding back to what the minister said.
As I set out, the priority of this government here and now is to ensure that
farmers have practical tools to be able to reduce emissions, and
investing in the, um, mitigation tools and the
research and development pipeline that'll enable those tools to not only be a
reality for New Zealand farmers, but be a reality for Irish farmers, for
farmers in India, for farmers across the globe.
Because the opportunity of increased productivity and also emissions
reduction, environment and economics on two sides of the same
coin, is the, uh, real, uh, opportunity for
New Zealand. And actually, you know, you're seeing that as well with other
innovation tools that New Zealand are exporting to the world, uh, around
farm productivity as well. So that's where our focus is here and now, uh,
and that's, uh, where it will be.
Thank you. Look, we've got a... You've got a supplementary on this.
Just a quick sup-
Okay. Yes. Go for it, Cameron-
Min-
... and then we'll move on
... Minister just raised quite a few countries there.
Did you, is anybody looking at the, um, the South
American, uh, examples like Uruguay and their approach to
split gas and, um, warming from methane?
David.
Yeah. So New Zealand already does have a-
Split gas
... a split gas, uh, approach in regards to, uh,
its, um, domestic, uh, target, uh, model.
Uh, and that is, uh, uh, deliberate.
So that's the context between, uh, the broader 10%,
um, uh, aspect and, uh, the other components
being non-methane. You know, the, New Zealand interacts,
uh, significantly across the board with a range of countries, uh, in
this area. Our main interaction is with the Irish, it'd be fair to
say, because of the similarities around the pastoral base farming
system. Uh, and again, our focus really is, is
around investment in R&D and innovation on productivity,
uh, and, uh, emissions reduction.
That's where we-
But Uruguay does have a pastoral base farming system as well.
It's very similar to New Zealand. Has anyone looked at measuring that against what
the Irish are doing, say, or other countries in the EU?
Uh, yes. And, uh, there's been significant work
underway. We're continually looking at, and working with constructively, with
other farming nations in regards to process.
But what we're talking about here is less about
what the targets are and the, and the process and the mechanism.
What are the tools and actions we've got in the toolkit that we actually can take
action and deliver outcomes?
Mm-hmm.
And that is where the focus is under the current government policy, first and
foremost. We've reset our targets, um, in regards to a
biogenic, uh, methane target, which we'll be aware of.
Um, and you know, we've interacted closely with, you know, UK and EU
on our domestic policies and the policy implications that were
raised previously. Uh, it is not of our view, or we
obviously take our obligations under FTAs very seriously, uh,
but, uh, we are, um, comfortable that the policy
decisions that we're making, uh, do not have, uh,
any, uh, significant implications in the context of our relationships,
nor with our free trade agreements.
Thank you. Look, we are gonna move to a new primary, um, from Ryan Hamilton, and
then we'll come to Debbie.
Oh, thanks, um, Chair.
Oh. That's all right. Yeah, you've got a primary as well, but you've already had a
question, so we're just sharing the questions around a little bit Chloe-
Oh, I haven't had a primary
... uh, to make sure we traverse all the different areas You had a primary at the
start?
No. It was-
Okay. Oh, that was-
It was done-
... in relation to ETS.
No, that was off the back. That was-
Okay. Got that
... by the subs.
Okay. Noted. I'll come to Ryan.
Oh, thanks, Chair and Minister. Just in the spirit of that excitement that you
alluded to. I noticed later this year we've got New Zealand's first
national adaption flood map. Just wondered if you could speak
to that and what your expectation is around the data collection and how
that'll help councils, infrastructure providers, and communities
to, I guess, make better informed decisions around resilience.
Yeah. So a key action of our
climate adaptation framework is going to be amending the Climate Change Response
Act to clarify the requirements for local government to
require them to have adaptation plans in high priority areas.
Equally, a key enablement of that is ensuring that New Zealand
people and New Zealand public can have access to, in effect, what
will be the first generation New Zealand flood map.
At its real basic premise, this is about making sure that New
Zealanders have the best information and data
available to make the most informed decisions around where they live, where they
buy, where they rent.
And as a result of having good information to make informed decisions then,
we expect that that will flow through in terms of broader benefits.
So that flood map's underway. It's had funding in the budget.
First generation of the map will start to be released from the end of this year,
and we're working very closely with the private sector and NGO
sector, Iwi Māori, around that process, including with data
sets that are held not only by government but also by banks, insurers, and
other components. A single source for New Zealanders to be able to
access.
And floods isn't the only natural hazard that New Zealand faces,
but it is the intent that we do floods first and foremost, and
then we start to ensure that we have other key components.
And so that's one of the four key components of the climate adaptation framework,
that-- And I do just want to acknowledge that this committee in its prior
term and with the work that's been done this term across the aisles around that
adaptation framework, has helped to inform that policy
position. There's still quite significant questions and challenges
around policy that sit outside of that, which we will continue to do in future
terms. But we're out of the blocks, and that legislation remains
of the view that we want to have that in before the election.
Yeah, just a quick sup. Yeah, I think FEC also did some work on that, which was
also-
Mm
... quite a really-
Can I just supplement?
... excellent committee.
On the FEC
But just on the data framework-
Yeah. I've got a couple subs
... the PCE's been a big component of data
collection and synthesis of data across the country.
Are you seeing a better synergy of data
collaboration or, I guess, a unification rather than all these
disparate data sets?
Yeah, the reality of what we have today is, is we have
significant disparities, duplication, and gaps in the data
set. And so it's really a postcode lottery of where you live in New Zealand in
terms of the information you have available to make an informed decision.
Mm-hmm.
That's not acceptable, and that drives inefficiencies, and
actually has real world consequences in regards to that.
And there's also a good portion of the New Zealand population who, through no
means or problems of themselves, are in a position where they're at higher
risk than others because of where they've built or where they live because of the
lack of information. And so I think there's an acknowledgement across the-
Mm.
Across the aisle that-
Yeah
... we need better information and better data to make better decisions.
And we need, government does play a role in being able to, because it holds so much
of that data, to make that available and freely accessible to the New Zealand
public so that they can make more informed decisions and work with other
intermediaries. You think about, you go onto a website and,
types it in, Trade Me. You type in a property and you type in an address, and
it brings up other attributes of that property, schools nearby, et
cetera. You can imagine in a future state whether that or other sources, even
banks-
Yeah
... you can go and type it, and it brings up that data set so that you can have
more informed decisions. I think that's the reality of what we can start to
expect next year. And that's quite exciting because it's only a
matter of time before we have the next most significant weather event.
And the challenge has always been across the board is, have we been able
to take a step forward from where we were in the past to be better prepared for
that? And we're on that trajectory.
Look, we've opened up quite a discussion on climate adaptation.
Rachel, you've got a supplementary here.
Yeah, just two very tiny ones. Did you just say that,
the adaptation bill will be introduced in this term of
government?
Was one, and then my second one is, you were just talking about making data
accessible and government data. Is there also an intention to
coordinate the data from other
councils or universities or CRIs or whatever?
So on the second part of the question, absolutely.
Data, or equally, local government don't always have all information
as well-
Sure
... across the six, seven, so that's definitely part of that consistent, freely
accessible, one sort of golden source of the truth,
and making sure we're using and pulling data from all parts of
the economy, not just government sources.
Yeah, that was the question.
The first part, it remains our intent that we want to have that bill
introduced, but it will go through a select committee process.
So realistically, we'll be doing a full select committee
process. So that won't be happening before the election, but the bill will be...
It will remain in our intent to introduce it before the election.
Okay.
Chloe, you've got a supplementary there.
Yeah. Of course, Minister, the record will show that in your national adaptation
plan from the change of government, that you cut a third of the actions from the
former administration and also cut 41% in flood protection.
But in your cabinet paper on the 16th of October last year,
you said that it was the government's approach that, quote, "Those who benefit the
most from an investment in risk reduction should contribute more," end quote.
Is that to be taken as meaning that the people who are at the frontline of climate
change, sea level rise, and otherwise, who tend to be rural and tend
to have lower incomes, are the ones who will be paying the cost of climate
adaptation?
No, you can't infer that. What it does infer, though, is
that
the concept that someone who has private property rights, you own a private
property, that intervention and infrastructure
investment by government to protect those properties does protect that
asset.
And that's-
So how is that different? Sorry, because that's exactly the same thing that I'm
saying.
Well,
no, it is just simply an acknowledgement that there is a correlation
between those two points. But your question or inference is that
somehow that there is a priority of that over someone else, and
that is-
No, my point is merely to explain beneficiary pays.
So I'm saying, can you explain beneficiary pays?
Because we know that those who are disproportionately impacted by climate change
tend to be lower income, tend to be rural, tend to be coastal.
And I guess I'm trying to have you explain the fact that why is it that they
should disproportionately shoulder the cost.
So the
Climate Adaptation Independent Reference Group, and I think the select committee
also traversed this topic significantly.
There is a portion of the population, low income, those that
have
lack of means and also lack of information, are
generally more adversely impacted by climate change because they live
in areas that are low lying and like I-- that is a-
Fact
... reality and a fact, and a problem in the
context of how you transition to a position where, in effect,
beneficiary pays.
And-
Which is your government's position.
Mm-hmm.
Yeah.
Well, our position
over a period of transition, so we've always said
it needs to be, say, 15 or 20 years from now,
we want to be in a position where instead of the liability sitting
pretty much squarely with government, because of the fiscal cost of these
events, as you'll be aware, needs to be rebalanced, to be
able to sit more squarely with the beneficiary of that
asset. But there is a group and a population portion that we
do need to support in regards to that transition.
We haven't defined what that looks like in terms of who pays and how do you
share that cost. We've signaled-
You deferred that in October, yeah
... which, because we know that that's really complex and across political lines,
I think we know there's a problem, but how you solve that is
something that we need to work together.
And we're very open in wanting to work together around that.
I mean-
But you
and I will have differing views of how to solve that.
I think what's important is, is that we need to reach a position of problem
statement, options to resolve, and then the mechanism in
order to have that. So that it's an enduring position of policy.
Awesome.
And the other thing is, it's fair to say,
we do need to continue to maintain momentum of progress in this area,
right?
It is,
and will be, the most significant fiscal and financial risk, probably over and
above retirement age,
that the New Zealand Crown balance sheet will face in the next 30 to 50 years.
And we need to think about the frameworks and mechanisms that will
support future governments to be able to manage that, but more importantly,
protect the New Zealand public.
So why does it-
Look, we're just going to take two last supplementaries on climate adaptation and
then move on. So we'll go to David and then Deborah.
That might have been answered.
Okay, you've been answered. Okay, David.
It follows on from Chloe's question.
In recent times, there's been significant investment by the government in
flood management, alongside
local councils and all that. Can you sort of talk to about how
that demonstrates
when you're trying to get the user pay?
Because clearly, flood protection also protects
state assets as well
as local and private assets in that.
So perhaps you could talk to that.
Yeah, absolutely. And I think
while there's numbers thrown around
increased, decrease in funding, you've got to look at the total system
spend. And you think about how much NZTA has funded in
terms of fixing roads that were destroyed in Northland or
Coromandel. There's billions of dollars of investment that's gone
into more resilient infrastructure,
which may not be the line item of flood resilience, but is
actually pretty critical infrastructure and economy level to protect us from the
impacts of climate change. And importantly, what's good to know is that
NZTA are, when they rebuild roads and
corridors now versus in the past, are very much
focused on building more resilient infrastructure that can withstand
these events happening again, versus just having to simply replace all the time.
So when I look at spend by government on this area, I look at the whole
package of investment.
But aside from that, the flood resilience
aspect, and the Chair will know it well because it's in her
backyard,
around protecting communities. The examples of
flood resilience, protecting marae in the Hawke's Bay
area where we announced that is a really positive
aspect. This is about community resilience.
Yeah.
And also equally, we've got quite strategic energy
sector infrastructure, transformers, and generation that
equally needs to be protected as well.
And then in Auckland, for example, in urban centers,
with the post-Auckland floods, that is a reality of
actually these events aren't just provincial, rural, and
other parts. They equally impact urban, and Dunedin South is
another good example around that where adaptation is underway.
And of course, well known to us is Westport as well, which has
had funding, again, initiated under the prior government, but
continued under this government because that's a strategic area of
priority. Westport's highly vulnerable, 3,500 homes.
The good thing what's happening in Westport is that,
pretty much working with banks and insurers to acknowledge that
in a context where retreat is the survival solution economically because it's the
lowest cost way to do so- Should another event occur, then the bank's
insurers will work with the community and the owners to say, "Hey, now's the time
that we should look to relocate." So all that planning.
And it goes back to why we need those legislative high-risk adaptation plans that
we're going to legislate, because you think about high-risk areas, and I'm not
forebearing what they are, but you could say Westport or Dunedin
South or Coromandel, whatever they are.
That's why we need to have those plans in place so that a decade from now, should
we be faced with that scenario, the plan's ready to come off the shelf to know what
we will do in that scenario, versus being reactive.
And that's
been the state of where we've been in the last decade.
And we're making good progress on that.
But it'll never be fast enough for some.
Look, thank you, Minister, and yes, absolutely, coming from Hawke's Bay,
very appreciative of the government's work to mitigate climate change
there in terms of infrastructure.
But look, we are going to come to another primary question.
So we'll come to Debbie.
Thank you. Thank you, Chair, and-
Mm-hmm
... what is it? More to you, Minister.
You said at the beginning of your
opening speech, and mentioned the
Māori climate resilience and some of the kaupapa.
And that had been really successful and critical to those communities.
Mm-hmm.
Can you explain why the Māori Climate Resilience funding effectively
ends 30th June
2027,
despite the climate risk increasing,
despite
Marae being disproportionately affected and often the very
first to open up in growing community emergencies?
Yeah, thanks for that question, and I'll agree with you that I think
when we stand back and look at the progress that we've made around the
53 projects that we've done, or 53 Marae that we've
invested in over the last two and a half years as part of that Marae Climate
Platform, it has been a very successful program, and we've got more
announcements to come in regards to that work, solar,
water reticulation, battery storage, again, linking to the resilience.
Your questions around the funding and the current provision for that
funding is scheduled to end in
mid 2027.
It is an area of
a portfolio investment, of which the outcomes are deriving
significant benefits. But I don't ever get ahead of myself in
the context of discussions with the Minister of Finance.
But we will be, and I will be advocating that that is an area of
intervention by government that has had some real big success.
And I just acknowledge Marama Royal as well, and those
leaders across
Iwi Māori in New Zealand that have-- There's been a joint
project in that context between the Crown and Iwi Māori around that.
We did a risk assessment of every Marae in the country under this term of
government, all 1,168
Marae. So we've got a risk assessment of every Marae.
We've then gone on and said, "Well, of those Marae, what are the highest risks?"
And as you know, many coastal areas
are heavily impacted by weather events.
We know those 200, and as I said, we've dealt with 50 of those
200 so far. I think what would be fair to say is if we have an
enduring program in that regard, that would definitely be what I'll be advocating
for. And we will see how we go as we move forward in terms
of future
considerations in that regard.
Thank you. Just a couple of subs.
And that's really heartening to hear because I think there is a sense in the
community that 2027, it's ended, and
there are, as you identified, a huge amount of Marae
that are affected, and they are not
individually owned, such as assets in a beneficiary climate
adaptation environment. And so just a couple of things
to really understand from the minister is that you are giving an
undertaking that you will lobby hard in 2027 of
here to ensure that those projects carry on, that there's
continuity, and that remaining Marae are able
to tap into that. Because at the moment, Marae that are going to
apply for these kaupapa are being told that there isn't anything to
apply for and it's ended. So I'm not sure if the minister knows what the
response that Marae who are trying to plan ahead for big
projects are being told by the
officials. So I guess the thing is, the two subs I'd put them
into one, is of the 14 million appropriated for
supporting equitable transitions and climate resilience for
Māori, how much has been distributed to Māori communities and to
date? And to follow that up, has the minister sought advice?
It's great to get your hands on and agree.
You couldn't have a better advisor than Marama Royal,
and I hope that you listen to her more.
But the reality is,
are
you aware and seeking advice of the
projects that have come to an immediate halt as
a consequence of this announcement of the resilience funding?
Thank you.
Yeah, I've got
Gina here who's leading that program-
Hi there, Gina
... on my behalf.
She'll be able to give you a flavor of the proportionality of funding going
actually out to the frontline versus the industry.
Yeah. So just to clarify, to
understand the amount and then secondly, to
understand if you are seeking advice on the
impact of making that announcement and those Marae that have had
to absolutely pull the handbrake and on the ending of
this funding.
Kia ora tātou.
We've rolled out the funding in three stages at
present. Stage one was-
Over '24, '25, and '25, '26 financial years,
3.58 million benefiting 13 marae.
Based on the information that we received and the insights that we got from that
pilot project approach, we then rolled out stage two,
which was a further 7.25 million. So there's probably around
about over 3 million still to be disbursed over
the coming year. We're focusing on delivery of stage two before we
move into further funding rounds for the balance of the
funding. Also, where there are underspends, that also gets recycled
back into the program as well. So there will be further opportunities, but
because the need is so great and we have to be
careful about the amount of money and really target it to the high-risk areas.
So we have had a particular process, which is by invitation,
mainly led through national iwi chairs, NPSGs.
We've had really good uptake. But the focus has been on priority
areas, so we're being really clear about the criteria.
I'm not aware that
any particular groups have been told that there's no further funding.
We're not currently in a funding round because we're focusing on delivery
of stage two, but we will be looking to disburse the rest of the
money over the coming financial year.
Yeah, I'm quite happy to send to the minister the names of those who have
been-
Yep
... told that it's stopped. I think what's really concerning is that, and
it's great to hear that you're seeking advice from Marae Sector and the National
iwi Chairs Forum, but one of those representatives, Mike Smith, is
extremely vocal about how this
funding hasn't
aligned with what obviously their advice is.
The concerning point I want to ask the minister is, however
that's been apportioned or proportioned,
is that
the emergencies and the climate issues
aren't ending for these communities.
And as you said, it's just a matter of time before the next one.
It's no longer a matter of if, it's now a matter of when.
And there needs to be some consideration and some assurance given to
those communities who are
contributing to society and making Aotearoa the great place that it is.
And so it would be great to tease out for the minister that he is
aware and the
certainty to those communities is being provided.
And I think that's a really critical part of what your role is.
Yeah. Well, I'm obviously aware of the reality and the challenges that are faced by
our communities. It's important to acknowledge that this investment isn't just for
marae. Marae sit as part of a community.
Mm-hmm.
And that broader communities that utilize and
work as part of that, you think of Te Karaka and
Gisborne, and that these are a
combination and diverse communities that all benefit
from this infrastructure and resilient infrastructure, particularly in weather
event situations. So we're going to continue the work
underway. We've got additional funding to deploy.
And I think it is just one area of when you point to
outcomes that have been delivered on the ground around climate adaptation, this is
an area there, I think, again, we're working constructively in
partnership between communities and central government, we'd be able to do
that alongside the work that Minister Mitchell's doing around emergency management
deployment as well,
and other portfolios as well.
Look, we've got time for one last question, primary from Chloe.
Minister, you get the independent expert Climate Change Commission advice sometimes
months before it goes public. Do you read it?
I read all the advice that I receive from my
officials. And I
do want to acknowledge the role of the Climate Change Commission,
Dame Patsy Reddy and Joe and the team.
They do play a very important role in providing independent
advice to government around policy.
And while some of those reports are quite thick, as the member
will appreciate, I do work my way through them-
Awesome
... and take them very seriously.
So the July
2025 report from the Climate Change Commission says that we're at significant
risk of not meeting the second emissions budget, that plans are insufficient to
meet the third emissions budget, and there's significant risks without further
action meeting the 2050 target. And that was prior to your 12th of
October announcement of halving the methane target, your December '25 decision to
untether the NDC from the ETS, and obviously the decision at the beginning of this
year to fund an LNG import facility.
To that effect, things have arguably gotten worse with regard to an increase
allowed for climate change in emissions.
Mm.
How is it that you are still saying that we're on track to meet these targets if
the independent expert advice says the contrary?
Well, the role of the independent expert advice is to provide their
views based on the modeling and data that they have around the forward look and
the risks and opportunities.
So what do you know that they don't?
And so, as I've acknowledged here today,
that there is always inherent risk around any
forward-look forecast. And the challenge upon government
is to ensure that we have the adaptive management procedures and processes in
place to deal with the gaps and ensure that we are able
to stay on track. But in regards to EB2, which is for the
period ending 2030,
we are currently
on track in regards to that
budget. And that's because since the advice that you're referring to are now
that these forecasts change. But we don't
rest on our laurels, even though the gap there is 3.6
million ton.
We're still undertaking a wide range of activities
to keep an eye on that and make sure that we're going to hit our targets.
Can you confirm that your
ministry's modeling, the modeling that you're relying on, which if it's from the
independent expert Climate Change Commission, your modeling effectively bakes in
All of the decisions that you are saying will result in XYZ
reductions in emissions-
Sure.
Mm-hmm
... versus the Climate Change Commission, who are obviously pointing to
the actual real-world risks of these things not materializing.
For example, one of your emissions budgets relying on fully a third of
reductions coming from carbon capture technology, which is
completely unproven, and the industry itself says is entirely economically
unfeasible without government intervention.
Yeah. Point of principle is, is that the modeling methodology
between those two areas can differ.
And it's just to be clear around-
I'm asking how. Yeah
... around the methodology. I'm happy to...
It's quite a detailed question, but we can-
So I actually don't think that we're that far apart from
where the commission's at. I think it's
about
emphasis to a certain extent, and their role in making sure that
they are outlining and clear about risks and uncertainty.
So,
what we're saying, so our projections at the moment, is that
EB1,
it looks like, and it won't be confirmed until early next year-
Yeah. Last government and again in August
... we would've hit EB1. EB2's quite tight.
Is that right?
Mm-hmm. Yeah.
And so we've got a margin at the moment, and we will
update our projections later this year and next year going forward.
So can I just confirm that-
But there is a-
Just last, we need to wrap this up because-
Yeah
... we have met time, so if you just finish off in responding to the
question there.
And so rightly, we need to keep our eye on that because if things
move in the wrong direction, then there'll be some adjustments that are required.
EB3, we don't disagree with the commission.
We would agree that there is a projected gap at-
Significant risks
... well, there's a projected gap at the moment.
Yeah.
And we're going to need to find a way to close that gap over the next decade, so.
Okay. Look, thank you very much. We are going to wrap it up there.
We appreciate your time today. Obviously covered many topics
and appreciate all your input. So thank you very much.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Yeah.
... time.
Obviously, we are in scrutiny now with our
three ministers. We're missing one,
who I'm sure will arrive shortly. So look, I know
this is quite a big area with a lot of topics to cover.
So we will hand it over to the three of you,
potentially to open up with some opening remarks and a bit of an
overview. And then we'll open up, here he is, with
questions from members. Minister Bishop,
welcome to the-
Hello
... select committee this morning.
Sorry, I didn't realise it was in select committee room two.
Oh, there we go.
I was just wandering down to Parliament House and
Can be, yeah, hard to find.
Had to do the schlep over the Dom.
No. Well, welcome. I was just saying we obviously have the three of you with us,
so, in the essence of time, we will hand over to you
all to give some opening remarks, and then we'll open up for questions.
We are aware, Minister Bishop, that you have to leave
early, so we will open up for the first questions
in relation to RMA and your portfolio areas.
So, over to you.
You want me to leave?
If you have time.
Okay.
Well, thank you for having us. It's good to be back before you.
Obviously, in my portfolio,
there's three major things going
on. One is replacement of the planning system with
new laws, which you've got the bills before you right now.
So looking forward to your consideration of those.
That is taking a significant amount of policy work by the Ministry for the
Environment,
doing a great job on that.
Second major issue is the implementation of the
new system, for which work is continuing at pace.
And there is
large investments in the budget in
what we call the digital back end of the system.
So 294 million over four years
around that.
It's a government IT project.
It's been in the news a bit
in the last couple of days.
I'm acutely conscious of it, wearing my other hats of
infrastructure and transport-
I'm acutely conscious of the risks there.
Once we get into the questions, I might get Nadine from Ministry for the
Environment to talk about some of the risk mitigations that they are
undertaking around that, some of the governance.
We've got some pretty good people involved.
But yeah, I just want to reassure the committee that I'm really conscious of how
these projects can go awry. If we implement it
properly,
it will be potentially transformative for
the back end of the system, leave aside all the rules and the regulations
and that stuff. But just the way the
system operates between councils, the 78 TLAs,
and central government, is potentially quite transformative.
And then that's even before you get into the potential for
AI to be part of that.
National flood map is part of that. Obviously led by Simon Watts.
But natural hazard overlay is the flood map.
That's all going to be integrated into it.
Potentially really exciting.
Part of the problem with the system at the moment is central government doesn't
really know what's happening at a local council level.
They don't.
The system's very clunky, so multiple benefits out of that.
But yeah, conscious of the risks with
implementation, and I'll get Nadine to talk about how we're mitigating some of
that. Third thing is the
MCERT
ministry.
We had that unhelpfully titled bill that went through your committee, the
Disestablishment of the Ministry of Environment Bill.
It's not actually being disestablished, it's just being transferred into this new
agency and-
Deprioritized
Well, that's your allegation.
Actually, the point I was going to make is that,
quite the opposite, is that the environment not viewed as some
siloized agency that can just be parked off to the side,
depending on ministerial whim and government priority.
But making sure the environment is integrated into urban planning, urban
development, transport infrastructure, national adaptation, and the challenges of
climate change. All of those things fit together, and
making sure that we consider them in the round, in a properly joined up way,
actually amplifies the environment.
So I completely disagree with your characterization of
it.
But we can have a debate about that if you'd like.
And so those are the three things kind of on my radar.
And there's any number of other things going on as well that I could talk about,
but I'm conscious you want to get into questions.
So do you want to start with the governance of the digital stuff?
Yeah. So what we'll do is we'll just do the openings and then-
Oh, sorry. Yeah. Okay
... we'll do the questions.
Sure.
So, Minister Gregg.
Colleagues. Sure.
Look, thank you. I just wanted a really, really quick trot through
of budget
allocations, just milestones and very much
looking forward. You will have all seen in Budget
2026 that we've allocated just under $80 million
in funding for environmental outcomes, and
things like managing contaminated land, and fresh water, and
catchment management, and education and support of groups working
in environmental programs. There's also been 67
million
going into the product stewardship Tirewise
scheme. I do very much want to talk about product stewardship schemes at some
point, if I get the opportunity.
We've also allocated just under 120 million for waste
disposal levy payments going out to territorial authorities,
and 39 million of that going towards specifically for
waste minimization projects. And I know
some members have recently become alive to projects
like that, so I do very much want to talk about those as well.
The opportunities we are taking to
fund practical actions that will protect our environment.
And we've got about 100
active projects, which includes waste minimization, restoring fresh
water
systems, cleaning up contaminated sites, vulnerable landfills,
protecting valuable ecosystems.
As Minister Bishop has referred to, there's been a substantial
amount of work being carried out by the ministry with regard to getting
these new bills beaten into shape and up and running.
But overall, we come at it from the premise of wanting
to see fewer consents, but with clearer national
rules and environmental limits. It is going to need, as
the minister said, some really significant investment
into that data and digital tools suite, to create
this national and consistent planning system.
So you will have seen announcements in the budget regarding that.
But those were really all of the highlights I wanted to touch on.
Minister Hoggard?
Yeah. Just quickly for my delegations, probably the one I'm most
focused on at the moment is around farm plans.
That's probably the key one, and more so now it's
about working through how we're going to implement them.
And so once the,
what do you call it, NEA or NEB comes back for the second reading, all
the details around that,
or the farm plans, will be out there, and then we'll be able to talk
about that in terms of for farmers, about what it's going to look like on farm.
And then also start having those discussions around how it's going to be
implemented. So it's pretty much main bit on my
radar at the moment.
Brilliant. Well, thank you very much, ministers.
Look, we'll now open up for questions, and we'll start really around
RMA and fast track, and Rachel Brooking has got the first
question.
Oh, look, I will be kind to the minister and start with what he wanted to start
with, and that's the digital piece.
Sure.
And just a very small question on this, and then I can move to some other
questions. And that is,
you've said you're very aware of the difficulties that the government has
With big digital
moves. Happy to hear some more about safeguards on that.
But I'm interested in, you were talking about that
getting the information from local government.
Yeah.
And we just had the Minister for Climate Change in with us, and he
was also referring to these different data sets and the question from
government benches about the PCE's work on that federation of
data.
Yeah.
So, and
Minister Watts said that yes, central government will have a role in coordinating
it. And is that what you're imagining some of this digital
implementation will do, will be some of that coordination?
Yeah. So,
basically as I understand it, and I'm not an IT data digital expert, right?
Make no apologies for that. But as I understand it, we've basically got
78 TLAs, they've all run their own systems.
They've all got their own consenting frameworks.
They've all got their own district plans, and there's a huge amount of complexity.
Right now, part of the untangling all of that complexity is the
rules, is the law.
And that's important. That's the kind of legislative architecture that is before
you right now and the national direction that we will issue.
But part of it is the back end.
And,
we essentially are going to end up with one national system,
in which councils have to port their information into.
But theoretically, if we get this right, you'll be able to log in
to the system and see the entire country right down at a
granular household level,
everywhere,
and
have common standardization and methodology for how that's
presented, and that's where it ports into the standardization
methodology in the district plans, and the standardized zones and
things like that. And then the ability for AI to come in on top of that
and reduce consenting time frames is
quite large.
Yeah, so Nadine, have I explained that properly?
Well, and maybe just to help you, Nadine, with the explanation.
I'm interested then, the last comment about AI is going to help with consenting
when so much of the system is to
not need consenting except for
interesting things that aren't anticipated in the plan.
So maybe you want to-
Perhaps I could clarify. But to build on what the minister said,
it is a phased program here, and I just want to pull
out the phases. So the first one, and this is included in
the B26 investment, is investment in the national instruments,
including methodologies, consistencies,
consistent methodology, standards, templates.
All of that work, that's the foundation work for a
digital planning system for New Zealand.
Included also in that is work underway for a detailed business case,
and this is where the minister refers to, we've got a
number of assurance, governance, and expertise steps built in
over this year to ensure that the right
operating model for the digital platform that the minister referred
to is thoroughly tested in terms of its economics,
commercial, and governance. And those decisions are ahead of
ministers and ahead of the cabinet.
But the work this year that's been funded through B26 is into that
detailed business case. On top of that, there's also
specific investment in data. And as you all
know, and it's been an ongoing issue, and this is where the PCE has
spoken a number of times about this, there is a lack of
consistency and gaps in both environmental data, but also planning
data that's critical for both councils and a national
planning system. So there is $60 million of specific investment in
B26 on data.
So the important point there is that it is phased.
The reference to tools, digital tools like
AI,
what happens with a digital standardized system is you open up the
possibility of much more efficiencies, both for
councils. Some councils are already doing this.
I think Lower
Hutt is a really good example.
Always ahead of the pack in Lower Hutt .
Also, internationally, the South Australia
SA Plan statewide system is already
utilizing AI in a number of different ways.
So the potential is absolutely there.
But just to pick up the member's point, you are absolutely right.
The key intention, starting with the laws, is that there is significant
reduction in consents. So AI comes in
to sort of further provide the benefits.
But it is phased, is the key point there in this-
I'm actually going to South Australia to go and see the, go and talk to the people
who implemented it over there. It's pretty-
To look at computers?
Well, yeah. We're going to talk about how they...
Because they've done a similar thing to what we're trying to do through the
planning reform, right?
So they've got a whole bunch of expertise in there, so.
Yeah. Okay. Final supplementary on this point is,
to give some context, a lot of councils have used different plan
providers to have their own digital plans, and then they haven't spoken to each
other. That seems silly.
Who will own the IP for this digital system?
That's a good question.
What I will speak to, part of the key work of the digital business
case is doing what's called market engagement.
So we have extensive market engagement, both with existing
individual councils, but also the collectives, such as Te Uru Kahika,
and other collectives. And the purpose of that market engagement
is before any decisions are taken on exactly that question,
that we understand what the options are, and we understand
what the capabilities are. So it will be a nationally coordinated system.
So that's really important both for local councils, but also for
central government, that those decisions are ahead of ministers and cabinet
It's going through a gateway. It's going through all the gateway processes that you
would expect a project like this to go through, as an external advisory
group.
Yes. So we do have independent governance and independent
assurance. Two independent members, Greg James, who you might
recall from IR program management via,
very experienced in this area. And also,
Julian Smith, who is an independent governor.
So we have-
Hi, Julian
... independent governance as well as the standard gateway.
Pe- pe- people like to bag on government IT, but it can be done well.
I've been around long enough to remember the IRD transformation program, which no
one ever talks about, but was 1.3 billion from memory, was delivered on
time and under budget because it was well managed.
They did a long
program of work to get the business cases ready.
They went through all of the right gateway processes, business, the DB,
particular business case, detailed business case. They had a proper governance.
Ministers oversaw it properly
and never gets any headlines, but it works, and we have a
really functional tax system because of the IT behind it.
So obviously,
the immigration stuff's a disaster.
But, with good governance and good project management with the right people in
charge, these projects can work, and I'm really focused on making sure this
works effectively.
Thank you. Look, we'll come to Lan now.
As a question for Minister Bishop.
Yes.
And RMA.
On fast track.
On fast track, yeah.
Sure.
Which is totally related.
Yes.
So thanks, Minister. I wanted to pick up firstly on RNZ's
reporting that $1 million in donations has
come to government parties for fast track-
Well, I-
... from fast track applicants
... I can't answer questions about that.
Mm. That's just about-
No, but what I am wanting to ask you about-
Lan, keep it on track
... Absolutely.
Yeah.
And so that's the context of my question.
Okay.
So the question is, because we've heard how you're comfortable with how
the system is operating, do you think there are
any rules that need to change, or
are you completely comfortable with current settings?
Well, it's completely unrelated to the vote environment estimates.
All I'll say is we follow the law like everybody else.
The fast track isn't completely unrelated to the vote environment estimates.
Well-
It's entirely within this conversation
... your question about donations is utterly out of order.
It is out of order.
But, good luck.
That's the context of-
If you've got a question in relation to RMA reform-
Well, you claim it's the context
... or fast track, that is fine
... you claim it's the context. We follow the law like everybody else.
You're in control of the law.
I could provide some further context.
As a minister that sometimes gets invited to make comment on
applications, before we even get those applications,
we get asked whether or not we have a conflict of interest with the applicant or
the project. So as the minister says-
Yeah, ministers manage their conflicts
... we follow the law.
They exist all throughout government.
That's... Okay.
Ministers manage their conflicts in the same way you do.
That's very assuring. Thank you.
Did you have a specific question on RMA reform, the fast track?
Is that what you wanted to ask a question on?
Yes. So, my first one was whether rules need to change, which we've established
that the minister doesn't think they do.
Okay.
What I'm also interested in is the EPA relies
on the actual volume of fast track applications to be
able to pay its loans.
Yep.
And there are issues with that.
Yep. Have we got the EPA here?
Is the ministers-
No.
Are ministers-
And is Minister Jones's trip to Canada an
example of where ministers are actively going out-
What trip?
... to seek applications-
Oh, this is the one in the media today.
Yeah.
Oh, yeah. Well, no, he was there as...
Oh, sorry, I'll let you finish your question.
Well, is it a-
Sorry. So is it an example, are ministers actively
trying to drum up
investment and applications into fast track specifically
to make sure that the system actually functions?
I think you're drawing a long bow there.
We encourage applications from-
That's the question. I'm not drawing a bow.
Sure.
Let the minister answer the question.
Just let me answer it. I'm saying you're drawing a long bow in terms of the
linkages. We certainly encourage people to use the system that we've built, for
sure. And people ask me all the time, they say, "Oh, I've
got this thing." I say, "Oh, well, that all sounds very interesting." They say,
"Well,
do you think it's good?" I said, "Well, if you want to
get it up, apply and I'll consider it." As Minister for
Infrastructure,
through fast track, I've got a really clear statutory role, which is applications
come in, they get assessed by the EPA for completeness and all of the other rules,
and then they come to me. It is a stage gate process.
There's two stages for referral projects.
And they come to me, and they
come with advice, and
then I follow the law. So it's a highly legalistic
process.
Mm.
And,
I think two of my referral decisions have now been JR'd.
Is it two or maybe
a bit more?
Mm.
We can come back to you on that, but my decisions are subject to judicial review,
and they have been.
And so I'm acutely conscious of that, and so I follow the
rules.
But it
won't surprise
you to learn that having created the fast track, we want people to use it,
and
we encourage development.
Mm.
Encourage development. That's what this-
But Lan just asked-
... is the drive and force of this government is development.
Has a supplementary around-
Well, it's more of a primary
... the fast track. Okay.
Oh, I've got supplementaries on fast track.
Yeah, but did you have a supplementary on fast track?
No.
Okay. Coming over to Rachel.
Thank you. So just on this point of people using the fast track
and going to the EPA, so we heard at one of the meetings some
time ago that they need about 25 to keep going.
And so my question is,
does it make a difference in terms of the EPA funding and paying
back the $10 million loan-
Yeah
... that they have if the
number of fast tracks or
Is it how complicated the fast tracks are?
So, to enable the EPA
to pay back their money, do they need more projects regardless of size,
or can they take some more complex
projects? And I'm asking this because Simon Court was recently in the
news saying that he thinks the fast track should be used for those bigger, more
complex projects and not the smaller ones.
I agree with him.
So I agree with him. Look, fast track, it is what it
is. And I want the whole system to be faster.
So that's why we're doing RMA reform.
So, I don't disagree with Simon and what he says.
Fast track, one stop shop is useful for highly complicated projects in which you're
seeking multiple approvals. But,
some of the applications, I won't get into specifics, but you can see
they're all online, you can see them.
Some of them are simple housing and development projects and-
But does it make a difference to the EPA's-
Well, it probably does on the margins.
But, to be honest with you, I wouldn't get fixated about this loan.
Basically,
ministers were really clear the system should be cost neutral.
So it shouldn't be a system where we're spending tens of millions of taxpayer money
to subsidize the system because there are clearly benefits for
applicants out of a faster system.
And we were really clear right from the start that it needs to be cost neutral.
So in other words,
if you want to use it, you can, but you have to pay.
And the few people have blanched at the fees.
Well, I make no apologies for that because it's working.
It's delivering, on average, approvals within, I think, six months or so.
Well, that's good, but you can pay for it.
And for some of these projects, they're extremely large and expensive projects, so
at the front end, paying a bit more for consent or approval is not going
to break the bank for people. And if it is, you might want to wonder about the
economics of the project to start with.
Mm-hmm.
So these things kind of work themselves out.
And so,
the EPA, obviously, they've had to make all this investment.
There's a website, they hire some people.
And so we gave them a loan, and it's intended to be repaid.
There'll be overs and unders. I think we're a bit behind, aren't we? By a bit?
Yes, minister.
How much are we behind?
Anything.
A bit?
Not much, minister.
Well, we can give that to you. Well, you know about it already.
They're a bit behind, but-
No, we're-
But application volumes are also ticking up. I did 10 referrals last week.
So -
Yeah. On this point of referrals, and you just told us if
you want to get
it up, I will consider it. That's what you just said.
Do you agree with Minister Doocey that the
Pegasus Golf Course should be subject to local consultation?
.
That it should be excluded from-
You know I can't comment on that.
Oh.
Nice try.
Well, if-
If they, they haven't... So just on Pegasus, they haven't applied.
So there's all this talk that it's being fast tracked.
Mm-hmm.
They haven't, no one's applied, at least not to my knowledge.
And if they do, it will be considered as per the law.
All applications are considered in accordance with the law.
And does that mean that you end up with situations like Queenstown where you have
multiple applications and permissions
now that
have no link with planned infrastructure and are causing a
huge impact on that one community?
Well,
it depends what you're talking about.
Many of the projects that-
All that
... Yeah. Well, many of those projects have infrastructure conditions attached to
the approvals or will work their way through the process and
will require infrastructure upgrades to be approved.
We were quite deliberate in the way in which we wrote the fast track so that
infrastructure was both considered by the panels and-
Is it efficient for every development to have its own sewage system
rather than going through a reticulated network?
Yeah. So, this goes to an interesting,
almost philosophical point around development.
And,
it's largely a question about network
planning, and the answer-
There's the word, planning
... Well, the answer is you need both.
But part of the problem in New Zealand is that too often the desire to
master plan everything
has meant we
end up with a very constrained environment for growth,
and we don't get the houses that we need,
or the infrastructure built because we try and master plan everything.
And,
there'd be a lot of greenfields housing developers who would say to you that the
inability to build new greenfields
has been a massive constraint on the housing system, and I would agree with them.
Which is not to say that urban-
We're not in an infrastructure deficit
... which is not to say that urban density is not important, it is, but competitive
land markets have to mean something.
And,
through the combination of fast track,
and some of the other work we're doing through planning reform,
that will create
abundant development opportunities.
And that's ultimately what will lead to better housing outcomes for Kiwis.
This is the opposite of planning-
Thank you
... and results in-
We've got a lot of fast track questions, so we'll keep structuring these in
problems
... underdevelopment of infrastructure, isn't it?
It's the opposite of what your definition of planning is.
Still at prime minister.
Yeah, on RMA, Dan.
Yeah.
Yeah. Okay.
Thanks, minister. Appreciate MCERT's very new, but
wondering how or what your vision is for articulating strategic priorities.
Obviously, we've got regional deals, New Zealand Transport Fund,
the 30-year infrastructure planning framework.
Where do you see MCERT sort of shaping or collating all that
work?
Yeah. So, it's a good question. There's a lot underway in all of those areas as you
say. I've made no secret about this.
I've been just intensely frustrated over the last couple of years at
the lack of coordination in the system.
So we've got an entire ministry of housing and urban development, right?
Well, nominally, they're in charge of housing, except, what's the biggest factor as
to how you build and what you build and where you build it?
Well, zoning Planning capacity,
district plan rules,
and
HUD and MFE are now working quite closely together but I sometimes suspect it's
only because I'm the minister of both of them.
And so
MCERT is an attempt to bring those things together,
so that we're thinking about housing capacity and zoning
in the round as we think about how our cities develop.
Then you extrapolate it out and you've got DIA,
which is in charge of local government.
They've got about 70 odd people doing that at the same time as they do dog control
and citizenship and birth certificates and marriages and baby names and all that
other stuff. Well, actually, I think one of the things that's happened in the last
two or three years is people have woken up to how important local government is to
the functioning of this country. So-
Mm
... the stuff that happens at a local level in a district plan really matters.
One of my enduring frustrations is that,
and again, some of you have heard me say this before, is that central government
bears all the fiscal costs of planning dysfunctionality at a local level,
because our housing crisis, the fiscal cost alone is
extraordinary and all of that is subcontracted at a
local level,
subcontracted down at a local level. And so we need to take that stuff seriously.
And
so HUD's been responsible for housing policy, except MFE's been
responsible for the zoning and the housing capacity and all the rest of it.
And then DIA's been responsible for local water and the
governance of city councils and that sort of stuff.
And that all of these things are part and parcel of the same problems.
Mm.
Then you add in climate change, which is, as you know, the great existential
challenge, and thinking about natural hazards
and flood modeling, that's been done by another wing of
MFE. But obviously it impacts on all of the things I've just been talking about and
transport as well. So my point is, all of these things are part and parcel of the
same series of problems. They're all coordinated and that's the
contradistinction that I would make from MB.
What connects
Crown minerals, immigration,
and building and construction? All of those things are part of MB.
What connects them together?
You tell us.
Well, not a lot, I would say.
But yet we have the-
Wish you wouldn't have did it
... well, we have this mega ministry that serves 19 ministers.
So, whether or not that was the right idea or not, and I think I've given you a bit
of a steer as to my views.
We have it. But
everyone in the media keeps saying, "Oh, you've created this mega ministry." It's
not a mega ministry. It's a small, focused agency
focused on solving some of the biggest problems afflicting New Zealand.
And I've been really clear with Jeremy, who's here,
and the senior leadership team of the new ministry.
I want this ministry to be the place where the brightest minds in the
public service go and work.
Mm.
I want it to be the treasury of the 1980s and 1990s, in which smart, young
graduates, urban economists, transport boffins, smart
people go, "I'm going to go work there," because the work they're doing
across urban planning and environmental management and adaptation and transport
pricing, that's the stuff that's really going to unlock growth and productivity and
deal with the systemic problems facing this country.
So that's what I want the ministry to be.
And we've got a real opportunity, and I beg you to
take it seriously and not just think about it as bureaucratic deck chair
reshuffling. I beg you to engage in it deeply.
It is a real opportunity, and there's big excitement out there amongst a lot of
people about how we shape this up and deal with some of these
issues.
Mm. Thank you, Minister. Rachel, you've got to suck on that.
Yeah, I do. And I-
Never thought I'd get so excited about work
Yeah.
I actually appreciate it.
In your excitement there, you talked a lot about growth and productivity-
Yes
... and not environmental improvement.
I talked about climate adaptation.
And that's not environmental improvement in terms of
pollution and biodiversity, things like that.
And I have asked you about will the minister do better
for the environment than the past, and you've said yes, both in the House
and
in written questions. So I want to know what safeguards
will pursue contestable advice in a way that is
transparent to us in Parliament and the public within
this ministry. And I'm
also interested in
if you're saying climate adaptation is improvement of the
environment. Is
that the context in which you've answered my other questions, or do you think that
biodiversity-
No. Don't-
... and clean waterways-
Don't over-
... and clean air is also included?
No, don't overthink it. Don't... You-
I'm just responding to your answer
... you're being too mean-spirited, Rachel.
No, all of those things you mentioned are important.
I was just making the point that they're more clearly linked to some of the other
functions that we're merging together. But you're right.
And biodiversity, clean water,
clean air,
you're dealing with the natural environment bill
right now. But with intentions to set limits through the system for all of
those things. Some of those things exist now, but they haven't been done properly
enough. So that's the point is,
wastewater standards is a classic.
Storm water,
air quality, all of those things impact on the urban environment.
In fact, all of our environments, but they're particularly
relevant in our cities, obviously. That's sort of my point.
You're sort of making my point for me, I think.
You've got to consider these things in the round and in a joined IP way.
It's not going to be like...
Yeah. It's not going to change the world, but it will lead to, I think, better
advice, and it will mean central government will be a better partner to local
government on some of these challenges as well, because the local government gets
exceedingly frustrated. They've got a housing challenge. Who do they talk to?
Somebody else from Wellington turns up, "Hello, I'm from Wellington, here to help."
So the contestable advice for that fresh water, towards stopping the
pollution, what are your safeguards?
What do you mean by contestable? Because at the moment, that advice is provided by
MFE, and it will continue to be.
Well, it won't continue to be provided by MFE because there is no
MFE.
Well, but-
And the Secretary for the Environment is the CEO of the
whole of the ministry. That includes transport, which is
huge budget
streams
Well, MOT is
five times smaller than MFE.
Yeah, but there's big budget-
Yeah, it's all put on departmental through NZTA
... I know. But that can easily, you can see how
that could take some precedence.
Oh, no.
How are you sure that it doesn't?
I think you're-
What are the safeguards?
I think you're tilting at windmills, to be honest. I don't agree.
I mean-
We've had lots of submissions on this, that people are worried-
I know that, but they're wrong
... about how we can-
Let the minister answer
... they're wrong. I mean, I know that. But they're wrong.
I mean, there'll
be a whole stream of people inside the agency
working on the exact issues that you are talking about.
Mm.
We're not getting rid of... Well, I mean,
the bill was very unhelpfully titled. You know?
Exactly.
MFE is being folded into a new agency called the
Ministry Cities, Environment, Regions, and Transport.
Mm.
It's just what it says on the tin.
Look, we've got-
Environment continues to be very important.
And no safeguards.
Can I- We've got a couple more questions on MCERT, and then we'll move on.
Don't, you don't-
So we'll take a supplementary from Grant on MCERT.
Yeah. Thank you. Thanks, Minister.
One of the biggest challenges-
Don't need coffee
... control yourself, but you'll be all right.
One of the biggest challenges we're facing is
cost of housing. How do you anticipate these changes
will impact the price of an average house for the
average Kiwi?
The biggest thing we're trying to do is drive down the price of land.
Yeah.
And we've found ourselves in this ridiculous situation where we've
got 5 million people, we've got a land mass the size of the United Kingdom.
We've got a housing crisis, plus the land is exceedingly high, and that's driven by
urban containment policies and-
No capital gains tax.
Well,
interesting you say that. If we get this housing policy,
if we get competitive urban land markets and you get the freedom to build,
there will be no revenue from a capital gains tax because there will not be
unearned economic income from land banking and from people sitting on
land and relying on the planning system-
But who is going to pay for all of their infrastructure
... allowing them to accrue-
Who is paying for their infrastructure, Minister?
Hang on, let me finish my point. Accrue capital gains.
So part of what I'm-
Well, the minister has answered me many times now-
It won't happen because people won't be able to afford the infrastructure-
Part of what I'm trying to do-
... in the green fields
... part of what I am trying to do is smash the idea
that we draw rings around our cities, and people buy up land and then
wait for the land to be rezoned-
That's right
... and then capture the unearned economic rents on the
basis of planning. I mean, planning creates,
by artificial fiat, distortionary,
uneconomic or economic rents gained by developers.
Where is the minister's surplus and instrument-
So-
Where are the instruments to deal with that?
So good luck with your revenue for your so-called free doctor's visits, because if
we get this right, there will be no
need for a capital gains tax because there won't be any need
for it.
Yeah.
Thank you. Look, we've got another supplementary on-
The economics of infrastructure are a separate issue, but we've got work
underway around that as well
... Chloe.
Yeah. So just, Minister, earlier you said that the primary purpose of MCERT was
effectively to unlock economic development.
I'm just looking for you to reconcile-
I didn't say that, actually
... you did effectively say that. You said, and I
quote, "We encourage development as the driving force of this government, and
that's the purpose sitting behind MCERT." So I'm just looking for you to reconcile
a few different things.
That was about fast track, but okay.
Okay. I'm just looking for you to reconcile a few different things.
So you have said consistently, and you said it in your introductory remarks,
that MCERT is going to amplify the environment.
However, we currently have a context whereby with the Fisheries Bill,
your government is explicitly deprioritizing sustainability
and instead enabling more profit.
With the Conservation Bill-
Well, no
... we're looking at enabling the sell-off of 60% of the conservation estate, and
there is currently no
guarantee that there is going to be a protection of the environment.
So in absence of that guarantee, and with submissions from the likes of the
Parliamentary Commissioner for the Environment to make it incredibly clear that
there are no explicit trade-offs that are currently being proposed to the public,
what guarantee, in legislation or otherwise, can you
provide us that the environment will be the center of every decision that is
made here and not traded off-
Yeah
... against supposed economic development?
So a couple of points. One is I reject the characterization of some of what you've
said. Secondly, I'm not responsible for either the Fisheries Bill or the
conservation-
It's the context, nonetheless.
Sure, sure. But I'm not responsible for those things, and I reject the assertions.
The third point I'd make is that the existence of the Ministry for the Environment
does not protect the environment. Okay? It's a policy shop. Okay?
There's some delivery stuff in terms of funding out to non-departmental
organizations, but it's a very important policy shop.
But just because we have... I mean, it's not like when Geoffrey Palmer created the
Ministry for the Environment in 1989, 1990,
all of a sudden New Zealand got a better environment.
In fact, the opposite has happened in the last 36 years, and it's
the laws that make a difference, the funding, the data.
That's my point.
Yes.
So my point is, MFE
existed to be an explicit entity with the sole purpose of looking
after and providing advice on the environment.
I take your point that it's a policy shop.
Yeah.
But we now have them disestablished and within MCERT.
What guarantees can you give us that there is not going to be a trade-off for the
environment in pursuit of so-called economic development
when the context of other government decisions implies that that's what is likely
to happen?
You're drawing linkages that just aren't there. I mean, the status quo prevails.
MFE provides advice on the environment,
right now, and they will continue to provide that as part of MCERT, and
governments of both stripes will have to make trade-offs when and where they exist
about those policies' advice. Now, you obviously disagree with some of the
decisions we've made. That's fine, you're entitled to do that.
But those are decisions we've made, and we've made them on advice, and sometimes
it's against official advice, sometimes it's in favor.
Just to be clear, though, Minister You stated that M-CERT is
going to amplify the environment-
Yes, because-
In response to-- So if I can ask my question.
Sure.
Mm-hmm.
You stated that M-CERT is going to amplify the environment in response to my
point that we believe that it will deprioritize it by making one of a bundle of
considerations by M-CERT. So what explicit guarantees
can you provide this committee and the public of this country, who've
overwhelmingly opposed that legislation, that you are going to
prioritize, or as you yourself said, amplify the
environment in the context of M-CERT decision making?
My point was the importance of the environment will
be amplified through the new agency, which I stand by, because it
won't be a siloized ministry in which it's just environment doing
environment. It will be part and parcel of all of the things I've talked about,
like how that rolls into the planning reform, local government, wastewater,
stormwater, climate adaptation.
That voice will be amplified as part of those
decisions and those
policy streams. That's my point. Decisions around
the environment more generally
will continue to be made by ministers in the way they've always been made.
So if I can-
And you've obviously got a view about what you think the government's view of the
role of environment is.
No, if I can just ask that question another way then, minister.
Just one, can you just... I think we're going to move on, Chloe, because we've
traversed this over and over.
Final, but I think it's a final-
And the minister keeps on answering the question.
So if you want to just ask one last question, and then we'll move on.
So, Minister,
how would you make explicit the trade-offs and the government
priorities? Does the government prioritize economic development or environmental
protection?
Well,
it's just not a binary, Chloe. I mean, this is the-
It is in the context of fast-tracking oil and gas.
No, it's... No, I mean, it's not. I mean-
On the conservation estate, mining
... I just reject...
What do you think-
Would you like me to, um-
What do you think provides the revenue to look after the environment?
So you're saying-
Growth
... we destroy the environment in order to generate the revenue to look after the
environment?
No, I'm not saying that.
No, no.
Respectfully-
Madam Chair
... it's a facile binary.
Madam Chair, if I may, as the minister for the environment.
Yes, absolutely.
I'd just like to make clear to the member who I don't believe was
sitting in the committee of the whole, for the Disestablishment Bill, but I
did make the point several times that we have to be
really, really clear about the facts here, and that
the Environment Act remains.
Yes, good.
The statutory responsibility has transferred
from the ministry to the secretary, okay?
And actually, thanks to the help of this committee, there's
actually even more of an oversight and an overlay because the secretary is
now required by law to report to me as the
current minister and/or future ministers as to how the
new agency or ministry is performing
against the requirements of the Environment Act.
Okay, so there's actually more strengthening.
And I think to the minister's point, in having this
M-CERT, where
good folk from the policy shops from various different agencies are
now seated together,
we are actually already working on how we operation-- or not we, because
how they operationalize it. And the secretary and I have had
some
preemptive conversations about it.
But I, as minister of the day, will be setting
my expectations really clearly
as to the imperative that environmental
considerations are front and center of policy development, of
consent considerations and applications, and anything else that
traverses through this new ministry.
So I just think it's a bit of a red herring to be sitting
here making claims that environmental
considerations are now out the window and we're all about-
Can I ask you a question?
... economic development and progression. I mean, yes, we are.
But again, as I've said in the House, as the minister has, in fact, both ministers
have, we've always said that we believe that there is a world
where economic development
is deeply interwoven, interlocked with environmental preservation and
even enhancement. So, as the minister said earlier,
we beg of this committee, and indeed politicians across the
house, to give it a chance because--
Stop with the doomsday predictions.
Give peace a chance.
Let's-
Let's give-
There's a song about that
... the experts that are sitting behind us in this room-
You're ignoring the experts.
No, no. Not true.
There's something.
Let's give them the opportunity to prove this.
I can cite a bajillion examples.
It's unfair.
I also-
A bajillion
... illustrated in the third reading a number of international
examples where other countries are doing this with great
success. So again,
this isn't new globally. It's new for us, so let's give it a
go.
I think you're frankly all experts, so.
Look, we are going to move on. Rachel's got a supplementary-
Supplementary
... on a particular point.
Yes. Comment first. Great to hear the minister for the environment talk about the
enhancement of the environment.
Wow.
I'll be missing that. But also to the minister for the environment, the
bill that she was just referring to, does it not also
delete every reference to the minister for the environment?
Mm-hmm.
Yeah, because it's Department of Minister.
The-
Yes, it does.
The internet will.
Thank you. Thank you.
It does, but again-
But I take your point
... I'm not quite sure what you're reading into that.
You know exactly what she's reading into it.
Mark-
Like every other bill in the past
... have you got a question in relation to this topic? Okay, yes.
So just specifically on that, because in one of the initial
cabinet papers when M-CERT was decided to be established and the
Ministry for the Environment disestablished, it made it really clear that it
was contemplated that one minister would be
responsible for M-CERT, and we have that.
No, well-
It has not been-
We sort of do and we don't. So
sorry, you finish.
Well, there has not been an assurance-
Yeah
... about the ongoing role of the Minister for the Environment.
Okay, so there's two separate things, right?
There's two separate things.
There's two separate things going on here
But through the, I think it's the Public Finance Act, I think, there
has to be a minister responsible at a departmental level. Okay? So that's me.
Mm.
The Prime Minister's decided that.
So for the estimates and the appropriations, the annual
reviews, and all that sort of stuff, that's me. Okay?
That is a separate question to ministerial
portfolios and how many, what their names
are, all that sort of stuff. So,
the decision to have a minister for the environment is ultimately a matter for the
Prime Minister through portfolio allocations and nomenclature.
Okay.
Yeah.
So no assurance. So can I ask another question?
Yes, yes. Yeah.
You talk about the environmental aspects.
One way that you could offer simple assurances to
people who are concerned about this is
giving assurance that environmental limits in the new
RM system will be explicitly
evidence-based environmental limits. Can you assure us of that?
Well, the bill's before you right now, so it'd be not appropriate to offer
comment-
Yes. No
... around a bill before you.
Yeah, and we are going through that as a select committee at the moment, so that
is-
It's before the committee.
So no. But also-
But hang on a minute. No, it's before the committee
It is before the committee.
Don't, I'm not-
Don't take their marching orders from me. Look, we are going to just move on.
Grant's got another question on the RMA.
No, but yeah, it's actually farm plans we're quite keen to have a chat.
Oh.
Andrew can wake up now.
Wake up. Andrew's been sitting here patiently.
Sorry, before we finish, before we move though, if the minister's-
No, the minister's still here till quarter to, so we are just going to make sure
we cover all topics and all the-
I'm here for a while
... areas. So, freshwater farm plans is-
I'm not going anywhere
... also very much part of the RMA as well, but obviously the delegation sits with
the Minister Hoggard.
Yeah, Andrew, the farm plans and the whole use of them, how do you see them in the
new
bills, potentially, and why are they so important for the rural sector?
I have to make sure I don't get myself in trouble with what's currently before the
committee as well.
Yeah. But at a broader concept.
At a broader concept, I think they're sort of the tool you want to
be at the forefront of what farmers are focused on,
rather than here's a whole range of consents, and here's a
whole bunch of rules and stuff you're supposed to look up in your local
plan.
And it's more about, at a fundamental basis, it is
about identifying what are the key risk areas on
your farm, what are those critical source areas where you can
have contaminants lose or can move off your farm into
the environment, and then what are the mitigations you can take,
you should be taking to manage those.
To me, that's
the fundamental process of it, and I think it stacks...
It's kind of where we really need to start.
If you look at catchment care groups and everything else, that all builds
from the fact that each farmer identifies what the challenges are
on their farm, and then what those steps are, and then you
amplify it across farms and across the catchment.
And so, I would like that to be what people are focusing on, and
obviously, when it's written,
it can be written by the farmer or a consultant.
Then it's in much clearer, plainer English as to, okay,
this is a challenge in this part of the farm with these soil types.
In these kind of weather or situation,
you could have enhanced leaching problems, so these are
the actions you should take. That's stuff that
people easily able to interact with and get in
terms of,
if it's about, hey, there's a section of hillside here that's highly
prone to eroding.
The recommendation is doing pole planting.
Again, it's practical, simple stuff that sort of translates
those challenges when everyone goes, "Okay, here's the problem in our
waterway." Actually, so what does that mean for me on farm?
That is the translation for the farmer as to, okay, if the challenge is
sediment, here are the highly erodible parts of your farm that you should be
focusing on. If the challenge is nitrogen and phosphorus, again,
here's where you need to focus on. Here are the parts of your farm that can cause
that challenge.
And just one supplement.
Yeah.
How important is it that all farms of reasonable
size are involved in this process?
I think in terms of getting that
improvement across the catchment, you want to know that everyone
that is a decent sized farm
has looked at their farm and gone, "What are the
challenges on my property? What can I do to solve them?"
Yeah. Thank you.
Thank you. And supplementary, Rachel.
I was just going to ask the minister, and aware that we've got the bills in front
of us.
Yeah.
But if he wants to comment on the link between those farm
plans and catchment groups-
Yeah, of course
... and what you
see the best mechanism to be.
Well, I think in terms of
how a catchment care group works is
effectively everyone in that catchment care group identifies what
is the challenge. And so, I see having the plan at
an individual farmer level as key to that catchment group being
successful.
But how do they link?
In terms of...
I mean, there's not a regulatory link or anything.
I just think it's a practical link.
Okay. So you're just saying that-
Yeah
... people should, so should.
Yeah.
Nice main-
You can have-
... talk to each other.
Basically, you could have it that
the
catchment care group, if they weren't focused on it,
it might just be a...
To be blunt, it would be an occasion where everyone comes together once a month in
the pub and talks about stuff and doesn't actually do stuff.
There's got to be that focus on farm
as to what do I need to do. So I think for a catchment care group to be
successful in terms of addressing issues-
Then, the farmers themselves need to recognize here are the
challenges. Now, that's notwithstanding the fact that then there might be
some whole of catchment type approaches they can take, be
it pest control. Certainly, in my neck of the woods, there's been
a lot of challenges occurring now because of the amount of
wild deer in the ranges that are stripping out the
understory. And then, of course, you get rainfall events, and you get actually
a lot of sediment coming off our conservation estate,
just as much if not more than on some of the-
Mm-hmm
... pastoral farming areas. So there's an element
of some of those projects that need to occur
at-
Definitely
... where they're coming together and going, "Okay, we need to do some pest
control."
Yes.
Maybe we need to look into an engineered wetland as part of our
community, but core by-
But that, I completely agree with the minister-
One last question
... that the catchment as a unit for-
Yeah
... environmental management is very sensible for the reasons he's just
outlined.
Yeah.
But what I'm trying to get to with the farm plans is, are you saying, I think the
minister is saying, it's good if there is a catchment group, but if they just
meet at the pub and don't do anything, then that's pointless, so we'll rely
on the farmers to have their own farm plans, and there doesn't need to be-
Well, not everywhere in the country has a catchment care group that's up and
running at the moment.
Mm-hmm.
I know locally, yep, we've got a good number of them, but there
are gaps. And so at a starting point,
having everyone each at least individually having
that plan, and you'll always get...
I was at a group res-
catchment recently where 15 out of the 16 farms
in the catchment were part of it, and then every farming
community-
Mm-hmm
... there's always that one grumpy b****r that never wants to play the game.
And, so having some requirement on them to actually, if they don't
want to join up, if they don't like all their neighbors, and often these
issues can go back generational amongst farmers- ...
in terms of who did what to whose grandfather.
And so you want to have that basis where actually everyone, even if you're
not part of the community, you're doing, you're identifying those
challenges, and you're taking action.
You do need some regulations is what you're saying.
Well, the farm plans, yeah.
Okay, we're just going to move on now.
Lan, you've got a question, RMA.
Yeah. Thank you. So, oh, no, it's a sup on farm plans.
Okay, sup on that.
Sorry.
Yeah. So, the government's moving to a much more
enabling environment where farm plans will have much more precedence,
I guess, in terms of how-
Mm
... their relationship with the environment.
And we know that the government is cutting or
reviewing a number of freshwater
protections, and one of those that we understand to be under
review is the synthetic nitrogen fertilizer cap, which is that
190kg per hectare number. Now,
Minister, you've stated that compliance with the
requirements of this very basic rule are about
61% last year. So what assurances
can you provide for anyone
concerned about freshwater going backwards, which we've seen in
the latest freshwater reports, when farmer
compliance with one of these few remaining
protection rules to actually protect freshwater are
so low?
Well, in terms of that 190, the
rule there-
Mm
... that was consulted on.
Obviously, nothing's been decided yet.
There's still a lot of water to go under the bridge in terms of
where we land up in terms of that going forward, so
there's been no decisions made on that.
In terms of the compliance, from,
simple thing is, nitrogen's bloody expensive.
There's an internal regulator for most farmers, and that fact that it's damn
expensive to use, so you only want to use what's most
appropriate and actually make sure you don't make any
money by this stuff washing down the stream.
And I think a lot of it is just remembering to
actually hit the button at the right time of year.
It does give me concern as to whether I did remember.
Oh, no, I've still got a month, so I'll make sure I go home and do that this
weekend.
You need to get on it, mate.
Yeah.
So, sorry, does the minister think that such a low level of
compliance is an issue when you're trying to assure the public-
Well-
... that farm plans will be able to replace consents?
To be brutally honest-
Yeah
... having a,
I would be amazed if anything's actually done with these reports.
It takes a hell of a lot of time and effort to go through and fill out all
this information.
Mm.
And quite frankly, I think it just goes and sits in a
storage room somewhere.
But we haven't made decisions on where it's going, and
that'll be straight for the future.
Freshwater's not all parked up for until after the bills are passed.
Look, moving on to the next question, Priyanka.
Thank you.
Mine is to you, Minister Bishop,
and it's about the
recently announced Auckland Deal.
Yeah.
That you've mentioned as a landmark city deal, regional
deal.
Did I call it that?
And as a Auckland MP, I'm very interested.
Sounds like me.
So a lot of it, I'm just looking through the projects that you've listed in your
press release.
A lot of it is strategies, creating a funding tool, is different way of doing
things. And I want to know what
new funding that you haven't previously announced
for some of the specific transport projects and things.
What new funding is there for Auckland to announce?
Yeah, we way away from the vote environment estimates.
But,
in fact,
some would say a state highway far away, but-
Well, it would be
... I'll answer the question. So the-
Thanks
Deals we've done, we've done two now.
The third under negotiation with Queenstown Lakes.
They're not about funding. We tried to stress that from the start.
Everyone got very excited and assumed that
government funding pots of gold would flow.
It was never the intention, and it is not the intention, and was
never the intention. It's more about frameworks and structures to get good
alignment. NZET's obviously part of that from the central government end, but
they're not a revolutionary thing.
They build upon
what actually was already there for the urban growth partnerships.
There's the Wellington Regional Leadership Committee.
They've all got
quite funny names. So you've got Smart Growth, Future Growth.
Future Proof.
Future Proof, sorry.
Future Proof. They all seem to be focused on the future.
Anyway.
Building the future.
And
so in terms of the Auckland deal, the new funding, there's money for a tennis roof
at the-
ASB Centre
... ASB.
Yeah.
And some money for the relocation of cricket out of Eden
Park.
Yes.
And the development of Colin Maiden.
They're a bit bespoke.
Yeah.
Yeah. So there's no new funding. The point is that
from a transport point of view, for example, Auckland identified what they regard
as the priority projects. So did we.
They will feed into the next GPS, and they'll come up through the ordinary
funding processes, through the National Land Transport Fund.
But even just one supplement-
Yeah, one last question.
Yeah.
But even for the things like the major event strategy, the
various strategies and creation of funding tools and things like
that, that you've listed, surely that's got to come from somewhere,
either central government or Auckland Council.
Yeah. Well, there'll be some baseline.
There'll be baseline activity, baseline funding for things like major events and
both inside central government. We've got a major events fund, for example.
Do you have existing projects that you'll have to stop or
delay in order to use-
No
... baseline funding towards this?
No. The intention is to do it all within baselines.
Yeah, as budgets go by, we'll
consider
increases in areas where we need to, to give effect to the city regional deals.
There are
government commitments and priorities we've signed on the dotted line with the
Mayor of Auckland and the council.
So,
it's all future-focused stuff, right?
It's all about major events as an innovation precinct.
Well, there's no money for that. It's not like we've just turned up with half a
billion dollars and said, "Right, we're building an innovation precinct." There's
the commitment to develop work around that.
So it captures some of the stuff that's already underway.
And the same thing is true of Western Bay of Plenty as well.
But the
reason there's no money is partly a function of the moment you do a deal with
Auckland and say, "Right, well, there's XYZ million dollars for a particular
project," you have to do the same with Western Bay, and you have to do the same
with Queenstown, and everybody else wants something, and the government will find
itself broke
more than we already are.
Look. Thank you. And just one last RMA question before you
have to leave, because I'm quite interested to get the government's vision
and your vision in relation to renewable energy and renewable
energy projects, and how the new system
is going to
enable-
Yes
... more renewable energy, which obviously is a driver.
Well, my vision is abundant renewables
driving the electrification of the New Zealand economy.
If you think about-
Sounds like a Green Party slogan.
Well.
Tell me more.
Don't defame me.
But just take a step back. Think about New Zealand.
In a world that's geopolitically unstable,
that is
concerned about
oil and gas,
what's New Zealand's opportunity?
Mm.
Well-
Not much
... unlike most other places, we have abundant, cheap renewables.
We do.
Our challenge is we've basically been useless at taking advantage of that,
because of our planning system. So, like all roads lead back to... Well, not roads.
Roads is wrong. Roads is right.
Yeah.
All train tracks.
All cycleways lead back to RMA reform.
Expensive cycleways.
And
we've made some changes to the National Policy
Statement on Renewable Energy already.
Feedback on that is quite interesting, by the way.
Feedback coming through from
people involved in renewables is just even those changes we made to the
NPS have made a difference at a consenting level.
Likewise with the National Policy Statement for Infrastructure, which we didn't
have until we turned up. So that's starting to make a difference.
And those things will transition through-
Well, it was partly started.
What's that?
It was all part of David Parker's reforms as well.
Oh, okay. Well,
reasonable people can agree to disagree on that.
And so, that's starting to make a difference, and they'll all transition into the
new system. But
geothermal, big opportunities there around supercritical geothermal.
Put some money behind that. Big opportunities around wind, particularly offshore.
We've got the bill before Parliament to get the offshore wind regime underway.
That'll hopefully pass before the election.
Big opportunities around solar. The price of solar has plummeted in the last 10, 15
years. Real opportunities there.
But this is where if Chloe was here, she'd have
heart
palpitations.
When dry years turn up,
you need to keep the lights on, and when you run out of gas, you've got a
problem, and that's what's happened.
And so you need a blend of both, but actually, having the firming
capacity-
That's right
...
of
fossil fuel,
and this is what people sometimes don't get, I think, is the firming capacity of
fossil fuels crowds in the renewables.
It's actually a necessary precondition for the development of the
abundant renewables. And I think last quarter we were at 93%
renewable energy. It's world leading. It's fantastic stuff. 96.
There you go, 96.
Yeah.
How good is that?
I know. Made a quick start on renewable.
Not wanting to get into energy, and not-
We've covered city deals, so
feel free
Planning. We've covered some planning things.
Planning. And not getting into the firming issue-
Yeah, okay
... but going back to your point about an abundance of electricity and-
Yeah
... this is what you want. Why then have you stopped the ban
on new coal boilers, or will do with
your reforms, with the change of the getting rid of the NPS,
National Policy Statement, and national environmental standards for greenhouse gas
emissions from industrial process heat 2023?
Well, it's just a necessary consequence of the, as you know, of the planning
reforms. But there's no future in coal boilers.
Mm.
The future's solar and-
So keep the ban
... the future's electrification.
All right.
You know that.
I do know that, and that is why I think that the environmental reforms
should talk about climate pollution.
Well,
okay. Okay.
Look, thank you. We're going to move away from RMA reform now-
I'm tempted to respond, but I'll just let that one go
... and move to both environment.
Okay, thank you.
And we thank the minister for RMA for
your time.
Some great discussions and points there, so thank you.
And now-
Right. Simply
... now we will open up talks-
Every time
... to members for questions around environment.
We will move to Lan Pham first.
Yeah, thank you, Chair. So we've heard a lot of
assurances today, at least coming from the minister, about
MCERT and the movement from MFE to
MCERT. And we've seen over this
government's term in particular, that there have been
significant job losses from the Ministry for the Environment,
now MCERT, and all of our
documentation and all of our concerns
so far when it comes to the
ongoing certainty for those staff or not, there's basically
big question marks around it. Everything says
we cannot provide assurance on that because of the changes and the
movement to MCERT. So what can
we, as a c- expect to see
about the implications of the job cuts, for example, that
the government has announced? What are the actual
implications for the Ministry for the Environment staff that are now
at MCERT?
Yeah.
Look, good question, and I'd like to introduce Sam Buckle, who's until recently
been the acting CE. And Sam, I forget your new title.
Well, I am actually still the acting CE until
the end of June. And then-
But we're very pleased that you have a new role to go into.
But, Sam will be able to talk to that.
So just on the-- I might maybe just start with some numbers, and the team will
help me out when I approximate.
But I think that the ministry's
FTE numbers topped out at roughly
1,000 FTE a couple of years ago.
1,200.
But there were 1,200 places. I don't know that there were actually...
There were more like 1,000 warm bodies.
Oh, good. Good. So,
that reflected some growth that we'd had
over a number of years, and part of that was about supporting the previous
government's RM reform program.
We had
some time-limited funding associated with that reform program.
Some of that was clawed back earlier this term, and so
we have been
working towards
some budget step downs over the last two or three years, which have led
to us having to be quite thoughtful about how many staff we
take on.
So we have worked our numbers down over the course of the last
couple of years to current FTE numbers, and
this is a combination of permanent and fixed term, being of about
130, 140 at the moment.
There are quite a large number of fixed term staff
with us at the moment whose roles will finish up on the
30th of June. So I think come 1 July,
when MFE
folds into MCERT, we will be taking with us, I
think, approximately
730 staff,
about 625
of which will be permanent staff, and the rest will be fixed
term.
Mm-hmm.
So that's what's happening on the 1st of
July.
Mm-hmm.
The way that the merger
has been structured,
and it's a merger under the
Public Service Act, is that staff are essentially being, the
staff that are with us who have contracts or permanent with contracts beyond 1st of
July, get transferred into the new agency
on day one. So all of those staff who have a contract-
Mm
... will be moving across.
Of course,
the new CE and senior management team then have
a job to do in thinking about how the organization is actually best set up to
deliver on the
vision and the objectives that
government has for the agency. And it's really too early
to say what that looks like,
given the senior management team haven't even had a meeting yet.
So-
Okay. So is it accurate that apart
from the specific resource management team, that there
has been some form of commitment that their roles will carry
through, I think it was two years or something?
No,
everybody has
So you transfer into M2 on the same terms and
conditions that you currently have.
Yeah.
So,
if you're a permanent staff member on the 30th of June-
Yes
... you're still a permanent staff member on the 1st of July.
Yeah. And what I'm interested in is post that.
Yeah.
There has been, if I'm understanding it correctly, a sort
of assurance that the resource management team will continue through.
Is that not the case?
It's not quite the case. What has been signaled is in
terms of a very high-level business group structure.
But a high-level business group structure has been
confirmed, and
most of the members of the SLT who will be responsible for those
business groups have been appointed with
one interim to be appointed. Nadine and myself are both-
Yeah. But I-
... members.
Nadine's group, business group. Do you want to speak to your business group?
Because I think that's what the member's asking about.
To clarify, because I think it's really important to make distinction between
what's been provided for B26 fixed term
funding over four years to support the change.
This is what Sam Buckle is speaking to now, which is the
transition under existing terms and conditions of all existing
Ministry for the Environment staff into M2 from day
one. So these two things are two separate
tracks. So all existing staff will transfer as of day
one. What's come through in terms of B26 funding
is additional front-loaded four-year funding for
that period. So that's where we get into the use
of fixed-term staff and also contractors and other
ways to deliver that change. So it is important to just
make those two distinctions.
Okay, so post 1 July, when the
transfer occurs, if I'm hearing it correctly,
there's no certainty
for any given roles within those staff that did make
up MFE. It will all be assessed as part of
the new structure.
All of those decisions are ahead of the new chief executive,
so that would be preempting what may come through in that process.
What is certain is the delivery of the functions and
services and program that the government has funded
through the funding. So for RM reform
specifically or the new planning system, that funding has been specifically
provided in order to assure that the
program could be delivered.
Thank you. Look, we'll now move to a question from Grants.
Yeah. Thank you. Minister, there is no legislation in that, in
EP or EPA delegation there.
Mm-hmm.
What are you trying to achieve with that?
And also particularly with respect to the EPA, what's your
understanding of their
efficiency of approving and working through
applications of various
drugs, bits and pieces for the
community needs, and it seems to have been a point and bone of contention
for a number of sectors in our agricultural economy in
particular.
Yeah, I think I spoke to this in the first
reading, actually. Look, the intent of
amending the act is speaking exactly
to the point you make.
Yeah.
It is about improving efficiencies and streamlining the
service. And yes, I too have heard up and down
the country-
Yeah
... of frustration with the system. I'll call it now the old system.
And I have heard it said that New Zealand become
or is becoming a dumping ground of chemicals that the rest-
Right
... of the world have moved on from, and we simply can't be left in that position.
We need to ensure that our farmers and our growers and our horticulturalists
have access to the same products as our trade partners, as
our competitors,
and to new and emerging technologies that are softer, easier
on the environment,
to be really clear.
Yeah.
But there has been an unnecessary burden.
It has been time-consuming. The wait times have
been shocking. We've seen the likes of
Bayer pull its R&D facility-
Yeah
... out of New Zealand, which is a real problem.
We can't afford to have that occur again.
We need these international companies to be here,
to be domiciled here, to be investing here, to be creating product that
suits our environment, suits our growers, suits our
specific requirements. So, the amendments
are driving at achieving that. We're
obviously looking to offshore examples and frameworks that
we can lift and shift here. Again, I had thought it was
going to come to you fine people, but I understand it's with primary production
instead. But I know this minister also has an active interest in
the sister act in ACVM. But look,
suffice to say, we've further resourced the EPA
with more money, their ability to have more FTEs.
We've got a refreshed board. We've got an incoming CEO.
That when this bill has been considered and
hopefully legislated,
the new team will be able to enact it pretty quickly.
But did you have any comment on your relationship with it?
Well, obviously, I've got the other part of it, which is the ACVM side of it-
Yeah
... and the food safety. Just backing up what the minister says, it's really
important we get these bills passed in terms of
allowing some of the
utilizing
frameworks overseas that we trust and can recognize, and
we don't have to reinvent the wheel for everything in New Zealand.
There are some certain things we've got to look into-
Yeah
... and make sure- You know, particularly for trade risks or anything that's unique
to New Zealand, um-
Mm-hmm
... you've got to focus on those things.
But the general-
Yeah
... stuff of
what does this do for residues in a wheat plant or something like that,
happens the rest of the world over. We can take that advice.
It's, will this have any bad interaction with New Zealand is the stuff
we need to focus on, or anything New Zealand specific.
Um, but yeah, there, there's definitely a willingness, um-
Yeah
... amongst,
you know, officials and certainly from ministers to-
Yeah
... move this forward and, um, get this working a hell of a lot better,
because we're too far away from the rest of the world.
Mm-hmm.
We're a very small market, even with-
Mm. Mm
... putting together with Australia, it's still a very-
No, still
... small market for other countries.
Uh, big companies, if they say, "Oh, here's our latest technology.
Do we want to register in New Zealand?"
Mm.
And it's like-
Mm
... well, it's tiny little sales for all this hard work. What's the point?
Yeah.
Mm.
And, and, and so just, and, uh, following up on that, 'cause I, I do get
feedback, I'm sure you've heard it as well, where there might be some small
technical change to a current product in use, and it's got to go through this
laborious process.
Mm.
And I get that feedback all the time.
And so, um, um, so that's the sort of thing you're hoping to, to fix with the
changes.
Yeah. Well, look, submissions are open right now.
Yeah. Yeah.
So I encourage any users with an interest, with feedback that, to,
to get involved and, and to make that, uh, clear to the, the select committee.
Thank you.
Yeah. I might just take a supplementary on that, because yeah, we're seeing huge
progress obviously with EPA and, uh, the products going through, um,
and a lot of the industries happy to see a lot of those products.
I think some of the concerns sometimes, particularly from horticulture and
some of those sectors, is the, um, I think Class C,
uh, products. Um, do you envisage that, uh, a lot of
the changes that you've made, um, and your kind of vision as a minister is
to obviously move those through, um, so
you know, we can obviously see more progress in the, in the agriculture and
horticulture sectors?
Yeah, look, regarding my relationship or my delegation with the EPA, um,
we've got as far as they've given me their statement of intent, so we're in the
throes right now of, of going back with, um, you know, a letter of
expectations of sorts. And I've already had a discussion with officials that
I do want the expectations to touch on exactly that,
because, you know, yeah, to, to, to the point you raise, we do need to make
sure that we're on a level or create a level playing field with the rest of the
world.
Yeah, brilliant. Thank you.
Yeah.
Uh, Rachel.
Yes. I'm interested in this appropriation im- improving New Zealand's
environment. Great name for an appropriation.
I'm afraid it might be the wrong name.
And I was very pleased to hear the minister talk about enhancement of the
environment before.
Uh, but we've had a 17%
decrease in funding for this appropriation,
and then a whole lot of the work attributable to the
appropriation is for, I think, doing the
opposite of improving the environment, and
it is about enabling development.
Uh, so one, uh... This is a question I've asked at these,
uh, reviews before, if the minister would
reconsider the naming of that appropriation.
Mm.
You had that chance in Committee of the Whole.
To more adequately reflect what's going on.
And then I also just wanted to ask about the
national policy statements that are coming under that, um,
appropriation. So there's the infrastructure, renewable electricity generation, and
electricity networks, and, um, these may all be
very suitable
NPSes. Um,
but the question to do with those is,
will any implementation of that improve the
environment? And by environment, I am talking about biodiversity
and clean waterways and air,
rather than, uh, energy production.
Mm. Um, I, I will get officials to, to talk to the,
the detailed, um, analysis of it. But, you know,
suffice to say, there has been a reduction given, you know, some of those
time-limited funds that, that the previous government had up and running that
have now, um, ceased to exist or, or, um,
expired, um, in terms of time frames.
But yeah, um, look, w- we are putting money into, uh,
initiatives to improve the environment by way of the Waste
Minimization Fund. And I think I outlined-
That's a different appropriation.
Y- yes it is.
Yeah.
But, you know, it's also, it's, it's achieving the outcome that you
are talking about, is, is initiatives-
Increased biodiversity
... to improve environmental outcomes.
But would one of you like to talk to the specific dollars and cents of it
all?
Uh, oh, coup- couple of things. On the, on the numbers, uh, I just am
not 100% sure about the 17% decrease of the
investment in the planning system reforms for next year.
$23.6 million.
And, um, whether or not that is accounted for.
We can, I can double-check that and we're talking to you at 4:30.
Um, the scope, the s- on the scope, so
historically, and again, I'll triple-check this, um,
that appropriation has been where, like, planning system
and advice has been funded from. So there is a bit of a history
to that. Um, the scope itself,
as the previous scope or the current scope in the environment, um,
uh, appropriation, is,
uh, carrying over, uh, into a, uh,
a category-
Mm. Mm
... under the, um, the new, uh, vote,
um, cert arrangements. And the scope language is very
similar. So there is a level of continuity there.
Mm.
Yes, there's discretion within the,
um-
Appropriate, has always been within the appropriation-
Yeah
... and will be as to where exactly you point that funding
and to what priorities you want to attach it.
So if you assume, as I do, that the new
legislation,
and this is hypothetical, you don't have to accept it, but it
will do
worse for the environment. Environment being clean rivers, clean
air, and biodiversity because it permits more
development and reduces protections.
Is there anything in the improving
New Zealand's environment appropriation that enhances
the environment?
Perhaps, Sam, I might just assist.
As a member is aware,
a lot of the national instruments,
whether they would've been under the RMA or whether they're under the Natural
Environment Act or the Planning Act, the RMA has
always dealt with both the built environment and the natural
environment. So B26 has specific funding and
dedicated funding for all of those national instruments,
including biodiversity, freshwater limits,
as well as housing and infrastructure on both
bills.
And they all go backwards and end up or
are paused at the moment.
But with respect-
So they cannot be implemented
... you're making an assumption that development will occur without the
expectation of environment or environmental limits, which are yet to be set
as Nadine has said, through national direction instruments.
Well, they were set and then they-
Okay.
Stopped the-
Yes, but we've amended the legislation
... and you stopped the councils from implementing them, so that's backwards.
So I'm just asking, apart from some
modified national instruments, is there anything
in this appropriation improving New Zealand's environment that goes to
improving New Zealand's environment?
I would just clarify, B26 does include $60 million of
dedicated funding into data.
Mm-hmm.
It also includes the standardization and the
digital info-- funding that I've referred to before,
and it includes a large portion of the
261 funding that's been
coming on top of for MSU is for the development of those national
instruments, including for biodiversity, freshwater, and other matters.
Thank you. Lana, you have a supplementary on this?
Yeah, because I mean, this was my exact question, but I just
want to clarify because I think it's a really important point.
So much of the expenditure in vote environment is,
and space actually, given our hearing so far with the
previous minister,
is taken up with RM reform, and so very little funding,
and I believe 79 million,
is actually available for external groups for
explicit environmental improvement or environmental
harm reduction.
So
is that the entirety? Because I'm noting that there might be differing opinions
about where the RM reform ultimately gets to and
whether it improves the environment or not.
But in this budget-
Mm-hmm
... is that the only thing that the government can point to
when it comes to a clear expectation
that environmental outcomes may improve or at least
pollution gets less?
I think if you looked across the votes, and again, I'll get officials to talk to
the details, but the government is funding
environmental programs and improvements across
votes. So if it's Vote MPI, for example, there's money going into catchment
group fundings.
There's also Vote Conservation. There's money going into pest
control eradication. So, I do think you need to take
a holistic picture.
Yeah, but specifically for environment, Minister, for your
appropriations-
Yeah. As Nadine has said-
It seems the only-
... there's a vast amount of money going into new data
collection because you can't mitigate or manage what
you don't measure, and that has been the great failing of this country for
decades now because we do not have that federation
of data captured. That is what we are going to do, and
that gives us an opportunity to have a more forensic
understanding of where the weaknesses are, where the degradation is, and where we
do need to be investing.
And I might just add, look, there's a number of ways you can break down and look at
the way that the estimates are organized, but just by way of
example, the non-departmental funding
includes, for instance, waste levy money, which is
actually statutorily required to be spent on environmental outcomes.
Half of which, of course, goes to councils and the other half of which
is retained by central government, but that's a statutory requirement that that's
spent in relation to environment or in the case of
local government, waste outcomes.
Mm-hmm.
So, there are some provisions, and it just depends what
part of the estimates or the vote you're looking
at.
Yeah. Okay. Thank you. Look, we've got another primary question over here.
Cameron.
Thank you, Chair, and it does flow in from the question line that's just come.
Thank you, Minister, for raising the Waste Minimization Fund and recent
spending that's been allocated from that.
Gotcha.
Just looking at one project as a bit of an exemplar of the way the entire scheme
works.
It intrigued me that you have decided to put
$700,000 towards a concrete processing facility in
Tauranga. As a local person from Tauranga and
a builder who's taken many tons of concrete to be
reused and smashed up and spent and used in other ways,
I was interested in understanding what sort of
competition effects are taken into account before such a s-
A dollop of cash is handed out to a business to provide a
service that's already being provided.
Yeah. Look, I'm very pleased the member's asked me that question because I was
looking forward to enlightening him.
Look, yeah, we've announced funding into
EnviroCon
to support essentially the new
construction of new facilities. I think with regard to any
conversation you have around this country regarding waste
minimization-
Mm
... our biggest failing is the lack of infrastructure capability.
Now, any company, and I know that you're talking
about one specifically in tone on it.
Well, there's two, actually.
Yeah, okay. Yeah. Well, but-
So that's why I asked was there competition investigation.
Any company, any legal New Zealand-based
entity can actually apply to become an accredited provider.
So, a good local MP might want to
let them know about that. But the entire
purpose of the fund is to reduce waste to landfill, and brilliant that
standalone companies are doing that as well.
It's not
a ratepayer slush fund. It's a user pays levy
that is very deliberately and explicitly invested into
companies that can demonstrate-
And so, Minister, you say invested. Is it a co-investment?
Is there an expectation of a payback?
And what sort of mechanism is there to make sure that
EnviroCon, the company you've picked to give this money to,
is held accountable to service that they provide to the construction
industry and people completing demolition projects in the Bay
of Plenty, like the other two private companies, one of which
is self-funded from the ground up to provide this infrastructure?
Yeah.
What is there to make sure that there is some accountability there?
And further to the point that you've just made, there's an assertion made that this
new project is going to divert 28,000
tons.
Do you know how much is currently being, or do your officials know how much is
currently being sent to landfill, as opposed to the already established
private businesses that are operating in this space?
So, on the very specifics of this particular project,
I can't
give you all of the details.
But we're happy to-
Well, you told me you were going to.
Well, look, there are a lot of projects that we fund, and I'm happy to dig out some
details, and we can bring them back at 4:30.
I think no problem there. On the general points you're making,
I'm happy to
comment. So,
I haven't been involved in this particular project.
I have been involved in the past where we have had
proposals or bids that
are in a particular geographic area where there are
others operating, and so we've had to give some consideration
to the needs of that region,
and what that might mean for other players operating in that
region. I can't speak for this specific case.
There is an element of that always being a
feature of a scheme such as this,
which I think you'll
recognize.
There is analysis done through the business case
assessment to make a judgment around whether or not
there is a need here, whether we think that they are filling a gap in the market,
and whether or not we expect them to deliver. So, that's part of it.
So you'd expect to see that-
It's a grant
... I've been-- The minister's excited to talk about the specific case, so I'd love
to give her a chance to talk about-
Okay
... the specific case. And
also one of the questions raised, a local MP should be making sure
businesses are registered on a government allocation scheme.
I didn't say should be making sure.
Well, a good local MP might pursue that.
And a good local MP might also take a call from a company who's incredibly
concerned that a competition is being started with
government allocation of funds in direct competition for a
service that they have been providing and have built from the ground up.
I know, I know.
That is also what a good local MP might hear about.
But as I said, this isn't entirely about direct competition.
This particular company met the criteria because it's actually expanding
its operations, in this case, down in Canterbury.
So that is how it met-
But 28,000 tons in total, 10,000 in Canterbury.
This is a new 28,000 in the Bay of Plenty.
And I think, though, part of the government's
drive is to encourage more product stewardship programs
across the country.
And I think looking at the vote here, you've got 67
million in funding for product stewardship programs, and I know
tire-wise and tires, agricultural
products are also really important in this area to
encourage that. Perhaps the minister might like to elaborate a little further-
Perhaps it might be lunchtime
...
on the product stewardship vision.
And can the minister just tell me as well, love to hear about product stewardship,
that's great, if she agrees with Grant McCallum that New Zealand should be aiming
for a circular economy?
I'm not going to fall for that trick.
But if you'd like to just enlighten us around the product stewardship vision
would be great. Thank you.
Look, product stewardship
is a fantastic initiative. You've all seen the success of
tire-wise.
There are a number of priority products that the government
has in front of it, synthetic refrigerants, rural
recycling, agri-plastics, farm plastics,
e-waste, and old faux plastic packaging.
We are in the throes of,
hopefully, we can get some legislation up that will amend
the Waste Minimization Act, which will then give us the opportunity to
create regulatory frameworks with which we can advance some of these
particular schemes.
But yeah, it's all trying to
sequence the timing of the House in order to get them over the line.
Look, thank you very much. Look, I think we'll have to leave it there.
We have met time. We appreciate the minister's
time today. Very valuable contributions and conversations,
so thank you very much for that. I'm sure there are many more other
areas we could have covered, but we have met time-
There are
... so we do-
A shame the ministers halved their time.
Thank you very much.
Or government members halved the ministers' time.
We halved our time. I think-